JHHXXX10.1177/1538192720968509Journal of Hispanic Higher EducationOhara 
research-article2020

Article 
Latino Student Retention: A  Case Study in Perseverance  and Retention 
Elizabeth M. O’Hara1 
Abstract 
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 2022, Vol. 21(3) 315–332 
© The Author(s) 2020 
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions  DOI: 10.1177/1538192720968509 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1538192720968509 journals.sagepub.com/home/jhh 

This qualitative single case study explored the lived experience of a first-generation  Latino college student in a four-year higher education setting, who despite obstacles,  persisted in college. The study revealed the need for a supportive system, both in  and out of school, with an understanding and respect for the culture. Moreover, the  findings revealed the need to “burst the bubble” leaving the comfort zone, to grow  academically and personally. The results of this study offer a valuable perspective to  the experiences of a Latino students. 
Resumen 
Este estudio cualitativo de caso único exploró la experiencia vivida por un estudiante  universitario latino de primera generación en una universidad de cuatro años, y quien  a pesar de obstáculos, persistió en la universidad. El estudio reveló la necesidad de  apoyo sistemático, dentro y fuera de la universidad, con entendimiento y respeto por  la cultura. Aún más, los resultados revelaron la necesidad de “romper el globo” de  dejar la zona cómoda, para crecer en forma académica y personal. Los resultados de  este estudio ofrecen una perspectiva valiosa de las experiencias de estudiantes latinos. 
Keywords 
Latino, retention, qualitative, case study, first generation 
Introduction 
This case study explored the lived experience of a 21-year-old male senior attending a  four-year liberal arts college in New England. The student was selected based on  teacher recommendation; he was selected because of his success as a student, his  
1Assumption University, Worcester, MA, USA 
Corresponding Author: 
Elizabeth M. O’Hara, Assumption University, 500 Salisbury St, Worcester, MA 01609-1296, USA.  Email: em.ohara@assumption.edu 
316 Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 21(3) 
accomplishments as a sport intern with the Boston Red Sox and Pawtucket Red Sox,  and his leadership as a resident advisor on campus. The elite (n=1) interview partici pants were chosen based on recommendations from the subject. 
A case study focuses on a single unit, a single instance, the issue of generalizabil ity looms larger here than with other types of qualitative research (Creswell, 2014).  This method was chosen because one in-depth case (n=1) provides rich and deep  understanding of the subject and breakthrough insights and/or has distinct, stand-out  importance. Elite informants were interviewed for this case study to illustrate the  need to expand the discussion of transparency and replicability to qualitative method ology. The term elite refers to individuals who have unique insight into the subject  (Kvale & Brinkmann, 2009). 
The literature reviewed focused on Latino culture, heritage, and Latino student  retention. 
As with any cultural group, there is a great diversity of values and beliefs within the  Latino community. According to Fanon (1963), “A national culture is the whole body  of efforts made by a people in the sphere of thought to describe, justify and praise the  action through which that people has created itself and keeps itself in existence” (p.  188). There are certain values that are common throughout all Latino groups and there  are specific values within each group. The literature indicates that traditional Latino  families place overriding importance on the extended family, gender roles, the impor 
tance and pride of the Latino community and culture, and age-based authority (Crisp  et al., 2015; Gloria & Rodriguez, 2000; Niemann et al., 1999; Stone et al., 2020).  Children are normally the focus in the household (Crisp et al., 2015; Gutiérrez et al.,  2000; Stone et al., 2020). Because of this, the demands and needs of the family and  extended family frequently take precedence over the needs and desires of the indi 
vidual. This is referred to as “familismo” or “familialism.” Latinos also like to keep  physically and emotionally close families. Latinos often have strong feelings of loy alty and support. Because of this loyalty, family influence can have a great effect on  educational decisions. This closeness of family influence affects a Latino student’s  desire to attend college, where the student selects to go, and even how that student  behaves while at the school (Phillips et al., 2020; Suarez et al.,1997). In fact, maintain ing that closeness with the family often is one of the major influences on whether the  Latino student stays or leaves higher education (Hurtado, 1994). 
The Latino male and female generally have traditional role expectations. The male  is expected to support the family while the female tends to the family’s needs (Gutiérrez  et al., 2000; Niemann et al., 1999; Patrón, 2020;). In fact, at an early age, males gener ally assist in the financial support of their families as soon as they are able. Hernandez  and Morales (1999) state in their research, “men and women in Latino households  ‘live in separate worlds’, each living their roles as unevenly distributed yet accepting  this distribution in distinct ways.” (p. 46) 
Current trends that are factors in male Latino student achievement include, but are  not limited to, academic and financial pressure and acculturative stress. Acculturative  stress is described as the psychological impact of adaptation to a new culture. For  Latinos who come to the United States, there are a number of significant stressors that 
Ohara 317 
are likely to be pervasive, intense, and lifelong. The stressors become more intense  when Latino students enroll in college, particularly colleges that are predominately  white. (Llamas & Morgan Consoli, 2012; Saenz et al., 2018). 
The research on retention tends to focus on the challenges Latino students face and  why they leave college. Researchers have attempted to identify ways in which chal lenges might be addressed in college programs. Much of the literature that addresses  minority college retention fails to give sufficient consideration of the cultural charac teristics Latino students bring to a college. The literature review focused on the intrin sic and extrinsic factors that contribute to male Latino achievement. 
The findings are interpreted and compared with prior literature. Data were gathered  through depth, semi-structured interviews, and written reflective narratives in order to  reveal the determination, challenges, and successes experienced by a first-generation  Latino male in college. The interviews, reflections, and elite interviews offered trian 
gulation of the data. This strategy provided a more holistic view of the lived experi ence of a male Latino student in a higher education setting. Finally, derived from the  literature and findings of this study, recommendations, and conclusions are presented  for further research, policy and diversity initiatives. 
Problem Statement 
The National Center for Educational Statistics (2014) asserted that despite some prog ress, the United States is facing an educational challenge of great significance. This  crisis is most acute for young men of color. Regrettably in the foreseeable future, it is  apparent that if current demographic and educational attainment trends continue, espe cially for men of color, the overall educational level of the American workforce will  probably decline (National Center for Educational Statistics, 2014). One must ask why  the persistence and degree attainment rates are the lowest among minority males and  what interventions could be implemented to increase retention? 
The demographic shift in the United States with respect to ethnicity has been  striking in recent years (MLR, 2015); the number of Latinos in the United States  workforce more than doubled from 10.7million to 25.4million between 1990 and  2014. This 137% increase dwarfed the 13% increase in the number of non-Latino  workers by more than a factor of 10, nearly doubling the representation of Hispanics  among all workers during this time (from 8.5% to 16.0%) (MLR, 2015). These dra 
matic demographic shifts will lead to a variety of national labor market and socio economic issues for the next 25 years and beyond. The Pew Research Center (2020)  predicts that the Latino population will continue to grow rapidly, such that by 2050,  Latinos will represent nearly 30% of the total population. As Latinos continue to  enter the workforce, labor market outcomes (including earnings, labor force popula tion, and occupations) as well as family/societal factors (such as access to educa tion) will become increasingly important. 
In order to meet the demands of the changing workforce and economy, the United  States must focus on access to college for the growing Latino population and improv ing college completion rates. Low college degree attainment has led Latinos to become 
318 Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 21(3) 
caught in the middle-wage tiers of the labor market (Georgetown, 2016). With access  to better college opportunities, Latinos can run faster toward a promising economic  future. Focusing on improving the enrollment and retention rates for Latino students is  an important venture, since Latinos are both the fastest growing and least successful  minority for educational achievement (Bell & Bautsch, 2011; Reyes & Nora, 2012;  Santiago, 2011; Santiago et al., 2010; Santiago et al., 2019). The transition to and  completion of college is challenging for any student; however, the struggles are  believed to be especially hard for Latino students for a variety of reasons, including  lack of financial resources (Olivas, 1997), poor college preparation (Garcia, 2010;  Hines et al., 2019), and difficulty making social and academic adjustments (Hurtado  et al., 1996; Stein et al., 2017). Understanding the unique obstacles Latino students  encounter while completing their education including the specific, intentional support  they need to reach their academic goals, is important to the future success of college  institutions. 
Pew (2020) reports that the educational attainment of recently arrived Latino immi grants in the United States has reached its highest level in the last three decades,  reflecting changes in where immigrants are coming from and rising education levels  in Latin America and other regions. The rising level of recent Latino arrivals has  helped narrow the gap between this group and the overall U.S. population. 
The purpose of this qualitative single case study was to better understand the intrin sic and extrinsic factors that motivated a male Latino student to enroll in and complete  his baccalaureate degree. While there have been many case studies utilizing multiple  participants, the literature demonstrated a shocking lack of single case studies. Using  this information, this study sought to expand the body of knowledge that exists regard ing Latino student retention and perhaps provide guidance for educational leaders.  This single-case study was designed and analyzed in a rigorous manner that allowed  the researcher to assess causal relationships among interventions and outcomes. 
College campuses are becoming more diverse and as administrators, faculty, and staff  work to adjust and manage through the changing cultures of college campuses, there is  a need to understand the cultural, motivational, and emotional differences of this grow ing population. The findings of this study may serve to assist college administrators  including admission, student life, and executive leadership as they formulate strategies  to recruit and retain Latino students. The information may assist them in a better under standing and adaptation to the unique challenges and needs of the Latino student. The  same is true for faculty, as they engage with Latino students in and outside of the class room; the academic and social needs of the Latino student can be very different; faculty  may play a significant role in creating an environment of trust for the Latino student.  Moreover, the results may serve as an inspiration to all struggling students. 
Methodology 
This qualitative exploratory single case explored the experience of a Latino male col lege student; how he thrived in college, the obstacles he overcame and what factors he  attributes toward his success in a 4-year predominantly white institution. The case 
Ohara 319 
study method was chosen for this study in order to discover how the participant and  the elite informants interpreted his experience and what factors led to his success. The  purpose of qualitative research is to provide in-depth exploration of a human experi ence; researchers must ask how and why questions to get to this level of meaning  (Lichtman, 2010). Case study design is well suited when the purpose of research is to  describe the holistic and meaningful aspects of real life. Essential to case study is that  the unit or phenomenon be clearly defined (Yin, 2013). 
Stake (1995) offered four characteristics of case study research: holistic, empirical,  interpretive, and empathic. According to Stake (1995). “the real business of a case  study is particularization not generalization. We take a particular case and come to  know it well, not primarily as to how it is different from others but what it is, what it  does. There is emphasis on uniqueness” (p. 8). The choice of a case study design in not  to enhance the production of generalizations but cases are of interest for their unique 
ness and commonality. Another way to classify a case study is an intrinsic case study  whose purpose is to better understand this particular case (Stake, 2013). 
Participants 
This qualitative exploratory single-case study sought to provide a rich and deep explo ration of the subject and breakthrough insights (Patton, 2015). The study explored a  first-generation Latino male college senior’s perception of what motivational factors  and experiences led him to pursue opportunities in higher education and a career. The  subject was a 21-year-old male senior attending a four-year liberal arts college in New  England; the student was born in New York City, raised in the Dominican Republic by  a single father and returned to the United States at the age of 18 to attend college. The  subject’s unique history having been born in the United States, raised in the Dominican  Republic and returned to the United States as a teen emphasizes his unique perspective  and cultural exposure. The study emphasizes the difference in Latino cultures. The  term Latino is often used in general terms; the Dominican culture as represented by the  subject is explored for its differences and unique traits. The subject, upon his return to  the United States, was mentored by a Columbian family again, emphasizing the  uniqueness of the Columbian culture and its impact on the subject. This case study  explored this student’s lived experience and other factors he perceived contributed to  his success. The student was selected based on teacher recommendation; he was  selected because of his success as a student, his accomplishments as a sport intern with  the Boston Red Sox and Pawtucket Red Sox, and his leadership as a resident advisor  on campus. 
Case study researchers collect detailed information using a variety of data collec tion procedures over a sustained period (Patton, 2015). For this study, data was col lected through depth interviews with the subject, and elite interviews with individuals  the student identified throughout the study. Interpretive techniques designed to be used  within individual accounts provide a wealth of contextual richness and person-specific  information without which that case cannot be understood. These methods are also  used to explore the nature of stories, their components, or ways in which stories might 
320 Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 21(3) 
be elicited or interpreted. Within-case approaches alone enable the researcher to inter pret an experience both through its parts and as a whole, such that readers can recog nize individual experience in a generalizable way (Ayres et al., 2003). 
The data collected reflected much of the work of prior researchers and their exami nation of Latino students in a higher education environment. The intent of the researcher  was to look at Latino student retention in higher education and understand how, and if,  the literature applied to an individual student who had completed college. The inter views were conducted to gain insight and understanding from the participants. The  research question was: what intrinsic and extrinsic factors does a Latino first generation  college student describe as important to his college success? 
Data Analysis 
Qualitative analysis of case study constitutes a specific way of collecting, organizing,  and analyzing the data as a process (Patton & Cochran, 2002). The meaning of a case is  often revealed in the search for patterns and consistency among the data (Stake, 2005).  The data were reviewed both during and after its collection. Once the interviews were  transcribed and the document notes compiled, content and thematic analysis were  conducted in the following four steps (Boyatzis, 1998). 
Step One: Raw Data Management 
The data were organized according to its source; interviews. The raw data were trans formed into transcriptions and the data were read and reviewed several times to gain a  sense of its meaning. General notes were made in the margins of the transcripts captur ing initial thoughts. Data that were not considered useful were set aside. 
Step Two: Data Reduction 
Based on notes, a preliminary set of codes to cluster the data into chunks of informa tion with similar characteristics were developed. To do this, initial codes were created  from two sources: in vivo, which case from the participant’s language reflected in the  transcripts. Other codes were a priori (Creswell, 2014) drawn from cultural theories,  which were considered most applicable to the study. The key study used was Nora and  Crisp’s (2009) retention constructs that used social integration, goal development, cul tural development, sense of belonging, mentoring support, institution and academic  support, and family support as key retention factors for Latino students. Following the  development of the initial codes, they were divided into clusters, assigning them con tent labels. The clusters were then organized and assigned themes. 
Step Three: Data Analysis and Interpretation 
This was a case study that examined a student’s intrinsic motivation to complete col lege and pursue his dream career. Moreover, the study explored what specific factors 
Ohara 321 
he reported that supported and drove him. Most of the data was analyzed according to  direct interpretation of the individual instances, rather than categorical aggregation of  data; although some aggregation occurred by counting the number of times a particular  code appeared. According to Stake (1995), “this is case study, not general qualitative  research” (p. 77). 
The coding process began with descriptive codes, but evolved as the researcher  progressed through analysis of the data collected. The generation of pattern coding  then guided the researcher through exploration of emerging themes (Boyatzis, 1998).  Analysis was concluded when coded themes were examined in relation to the initial  research questions and broader implications emerged (Boyatzis, 1998; Rubin & Rubin,  2011). The use of thematic analysis ensured that a consistent approach to data analysis  was undertaken throughout the process. Emergent themes were presented and strength 
ened by using quotations taken directly from the participant in order to more accu rately reflect his voice (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). 
Step Four: Data Representation 
The story of the student’s motivation and courage along with the cultural and social  issues that emerged was best depicted by the participant’s own words; crucial back ground that supported and augmented the story was provided by the elite interviews.  The use of thematic analysis ensured that a consistent approach to data analysis was  undertaken throughout the process. Emergent themes were presented and strengthened  by using quotations taken directly from the participants in order to more accurately  reflect his voice (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). 
Interpretation of Findings 
The findings in this single case study were analyzed and compared to prior research.  Many of the themes corroborated prior findings, while some findings from this study  were not noted in the literature. This section presents the findings and offers an analysis  of the themes compared to the research on Latino student retention in higher education. 
The key findings that emerged from the study expressed through five primary  themes were: (1) Burst the Bubble, (2) You Do You, (3) Support System In and Out of  School, (4) Orientation: Cultural and Academic, and (5) Respect and Understanding. 
Theme #1 Burst the Bubble 
The participant and elite interviewees spoke about the cultural environment in which  many Latino students are raised; protected and sheltered which inhibits their ability to  be independent and integrate into a new environment and specifically a college cam pus. The student spoke about being raised in a bubble, growing up in the Dominican  Republic where his father sheltered him from the realities of the world, and then mov ing to the United States where his mother did the same. Taking chances, stepping out  of his comfort zone and realizing his potential were very real fears he faced. 
322 Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 21(3) 
The literature reaffirms this finding indicating that traditional Latino families place  overriding importance on the extended family but tend to place little value on indepen dence, achievement, and deferred gratification (Crisp et al., 2015; Gloria & Rodriguez,  2000; Niemann et al., 1999). 
The findings of this study continue to support the claim that Latino students can be  inhibited from growth and achievement by various factors; this study identified that  the demands and needs of family took precedence over the desires of the student. This  is referred to as “familismo” or “familalism.” The literature contends that Latinos like  to keep emotionally and physically close families (Marin & Marin, 1991; Niemann  et al., 1999) It wasn’t until the student connected with a mentor, a Columbia mother of  his good friend and role models, that he was able to become conscious of the fear, face  the apprehensions, and with the support of his network, burst the bubble and begin to  realize his potential. 
The manner in which these findings affirm prior research about Latino student  family roles, motivation, and independence (Crisp et al., 2015; Gutiérrez et al., 2000),  maintains that children are the focus of the Latino household and the demands of the  larger family are a priority over the needs of one single member. Because of this  dynamic, it is believed that family influence may have a great effect on educational  decisions. The closeness of family influence may affect a Latino student’s desire to  attend college, where the student elects to go, and even how that student behaves while  at school (Keefe & Padilla, 1987; Suarez et al., 1997). Understanding the family  dynamic, according to Hurtado (1994), is one of the major influences on whether a  Latino student stays or leaves higher education. 
Sanford’s Challenge and Support Theory (1966) can be a key predictor in the  critical role the Columbian mother played in the subject’s life. Her ability to chal lenge him while also providing unwavering support was a significant factor in  “bursting his bubble.” She pushed the subject to learn to drive a car, attend college,  and think for himself. 
The subject was not aware of the bubble and when asked about his childhood, he  shared: 
Growing up in the Dominican Republic, I didn’t know who I was yet. I didn’t know what  I was capable of. I always doubted myself, lacked confidence and those are the things she  (Columbian mother) burst me out of. The first step was trying not to think like my parents;  to begin to think for myself. She would ask me what I thought, how I felt and what things  meant to me. It was a strange feeling. 
All these challenges were met with some fear but balanced with needed support that  was critical for his growth. The subject went on to describe the influence of the  Columbian family and the effect their guidance has had on him: 
So, you know, um, there were like a lot of things the Columbian family did, steps to help  me burst that bubble, you know? And then, you know, things that happened like, in life,  you know, I just got to know how the real world works. I love my mom and I think, she  is um, proud of me. But it took me a period of like maybe, years to understand everything, 
Ohara 323 
you know, getting to know myself. I mean imagine how long did it take me to um, just to,  to get the, uh, to work for, to be an employee of the Red Sox. It took me two years  basically. Imagine that—I didn’t have the mindset, I didn’t know what I was capable of,  but luckily, I had a guide to show me. She showed me. I’ve come a long ways.” 
The subject was motivated to look beyond family dynamics. He was actually, almost  forced to move beyond the comfortable by the role models in his life. His bubble was  burst. It is critical to raise awareness of the “bubble,” what it means, and how to manage  it as it could possibly have implications for recruitment and retention. 
Theme #2 You Do You 
This study identified unique perspectives of the subject regarding independence and  breaking away from the traditional Latino roles. It is counterintuitive, in the Latino  culture, for young family members to think about themselves; to put themselves first.  The Latino male generally has a traditional role expectation. The male is expected to  support the family while the female tends to the family’s needs (Gutiérrez et al., 2000;  Niemann et al., 2000). In fact, at an early age, males generally assist in the financial  support of their families as soon as they are able. Hernandez and Morales (1999) state  in their research, “men and women in Latino households ‘live in separate worlds’,  each living their roles as unevenly distributed yet accepting this distribution in distinct  ways.” (p. 46). 
A basic concept within the Latino community is the value of allocentrism, a sense  of identity and commitment to collectives and groups, rather than the individual. This  is associated with high levels of conformity, mutual empathy, willingness to sacrifice  for the welfare of the group, trust among members of the group, and high levels of  personal interdependence. The collective focus is on group harmony, with the avoid 
ance of conflict and confrontation. This is referred to as “simpatia,” which emphasizes  the need for behaviors that promote pleasant and nonconflicting social relationships  (Gutiérrez et al., 2000; Marin & Marin, 1991). 
The subject was burdened by the demands and expectations of his mother and  father. The Columbian mother taught him how to put his needs first, be a bit selfish and  become independent, encouraging him to apply to college, do things on his own, and  move away from the influence of his family. 
Subject: 
I just didn’t want to do the same things as everyone else; I came here (to college) to get  my education, get internships and jobs that will help my career. That was my main thing.  I am here to do me—I am doing it for myself. And that is the most important thing. There  is a phrase in Spanish that I often like to recall—remember me, me, me and then whoever  else. Not in a bad way but at the end of the day, I have to put myself first. My family  didn’t believe in it; I learned it from the Columbian family. 
There was still some lingering guilt about leaving the bubble his family created; but he  acknowledged, “You know, first of all, I want to achieve my goals and you just got to 
324 Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 21(3) 
do you. It’ll pay off in the end.” There is little literature about the culture shift and how  higher education administrators, faculty, and staff can acknowledge and manage  through the process of helping Latino students focus on “You Do You.” 
Theme #3 Support System In and Out of School 
A great deal of the literature on student retention offers mentoring as a powerful  strategy for attracting and retaining Latino students in higher education. Support for  Latino students can be offered through self-esteem and positive image building  activities, counseling, cultural awareness, leadership development, and mentoring.  Peer mentoring relationships are frequently identified as retention strategies.  Mentoring can help students overcome academic struggles and may encourage stu 
dents to become involved in campus organizations and activities (Dumas-Hines  et al., 2001). The subject relied heavily on mentors inside and outside of the college  environment; he was diligent in fostering and maintaining those relationships and  credits his mentors for his ability to navigate through the transition of moving to the  U.S. and his quest for independence. 
The literature points to specific mentoring programs; formal and programmatic  mentoring programs are important retention strategies at some colleges (Davis, 2008).  However, according to Knoche and Zamboanga (2006), although mentoring program  operation specifics are helpful and necessary for program duplication, understanding  the experiences of mentors, and others involved in the mentoring process is of addi 
tional value. The subject’s mentors went beyond the traditional role of mentors; sched uled meetings or gatherings or being part of a specific program at the college; instead,  they were readily available for personal and academic support. The subject relied  heavily on his mentors for guidance from learning how to shake hands, drive a car, and  cook his own dinner. The subject was a part of their lives. His needs were a priority for  them. His success was their success. It was a unique relationship. There was one pro fessor; who played a significant role in his life. She was a white, English speaking  faculty member who made an impact on him. He recalled the first time they met; she  insisted he shake her hand firmly and look her in the eye. 
No one had ever really talked to me like that before, I sort of knew right away she would  be good for me and she cared. It isn’t about ethnicity. You have to look beyond that and  say ‘ok, I can relate to this professor because I trust her. I can tell her the things that I am  feeling, the things that I am going through.’ And for me personally with her, there is no  other professor that does that—I consider her a mentor and great supporter. She has  helped me through so much throughout my four years. She wants to help me achieve and  to be in the place I am in. 
College administrators may feel that the time commitment is overwhelming and not  feasible in the current environment, but according to the mentors, it is worth it.  Sandford’s Challenge and Support Theory (1966) reinforces the importance of support  throughout a student’s college experience. A major component of that support comes 
Ohara 325 
from the encouragement given to the subject to keep him trying and asking for help.  The subject received support from the Columbian family, mentoring faculty and  friends. He was brave enough to ask for help, was open to challenges, and worked hard  to overcome them. The Columbian mother was quite clear “I want his diploma on my  wall. I will be there when he graduates.” 
Theme #4 Orientation: Cultural and Academic 
The subject talked a great deal about orientation, but going beyond the formal, tra ditional orientation programs offered on college campuses at the beginning of an  academic year. Instead, establishing a campus culture of ongoing orientation to raise  sensitivity, awareness and acceptance of differences. 
One must have a deepened consciousness and understanding of the inequities to  fully understand success for Latino students and comprehend unspoken assumptions  about students who do not “fit traditional postsecondary environments, and the unique  factors that shape the success of minority students” (Rendon et al., 2000). Institutional  support for Latino students can also be demonstrated through transitional services and  inclusion of orientation, first year students, and small living and learning communi 
ties. For example, orientation programs aimed at helping students make a smooth tran sition to the university are important for Latino students and their families (Hurtado,  1997). Based on existing research, institutional support does, in fact, play an important  
role in the retention of Latino students and other students of color. Subject: 
It is hard when you are a minority; when Latinos come to college and English isn’t their  first language; it’s even more difficult. And then there are so many faculty members  and white students it makes it a lot harder. A lot harder. It is a lot more difficult to sort  of like adjust to the transition and have someone to relate to. That’s where for example,  Sugar. There was no staff diversity in the clubhouse. No one to help him. The people he  ended up hanging out with turned out to the wrong ones. And what does he do? He  makes bad decisions and ends up out of baseball. That’s what (I think) happens a lot in  college; Latinos try to find other Latinos and they isolate themselves or the other Latino  may not be the best influence. But they are the only ones they can relate to; the students  just want to fit in and not feel left out. And sometimes because of fitting in and that  mindset, it can hurt them. 
Several colleges and universities around the country have created living/learning  communities for students to support the transition to the university, as well as, to pro vide an academic support system (Thayer, 2003). Studies have indicated that students  of color who participate in these small living/learning communities have performed  better than those who have not (Thayer, 2003; Tinto, 1997). This critical institutional  support provides students with academic support and social integration opportunities.  The subject discussed the need for a broader understanding and sensitivity to assist  Latinos with the transition to college. “Having that understanding all the time, and 
326 Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 21(3) 
being opening to learning, it’s like the whole team will gel into like, one team. Even  though they are from different backgrounds and ethnicities, they can learn to respect  the differences.” 
Theme #5 Respect and Understanding 
Respect and understanding were key themes throughout the interview process with the  subject and elite interviews. Respect meant more than being polite; it meant being  open to the opinions, learning and understanding different perspectives, and having  the courage to disagree and voice your opinion. According to Thayer (2003), first  generation students, regardless of background, face different types of challenges in  making the transition from high school to college. Latino students are no exception;  they often enter the college environment with few tangible expectations and do not  know what to ask for if they need assistance. 
The Columbian family played a significant role in opening the subject’s mind to  other opinions and ideas. The subject always agreed with what other people said; his  shy demeanor and upbringing made him feel it was disrespectful to argue. The  Columbian mother described it when she talked about dinner table conversations: 
We would have debates at the dinner table and he (subject) would always just agree with  us. He would just nod his head and tell us we were right; even if we were wrong. Then I  got aggravated and told him that he couldn’t always say that we were right ‘cause I am  human. I’m not always right. So call me out, argue with me. 
The subject laughed as the Columbian mother spoke and he quickly explained his  point of view: 
That discussion was a big lesson for me. The way I was brought up was to always see  things from my father’s point of view. And then when I started spending time with the  Columbian family, I started to learn different points of view and ideas. They told me not  to always agree with them. They wanted me to debate because the point of debating is to  fill holes and learn a whole new other point of view and get knowledge from another  person. 
Without being able to identify what they need; students may lack self-efficacy and an  understanding of the college environment and what is needed to succeed. Often, these  students have erroneous beliefs and information. Many Latino students fail to recog nize the long-term benefit to attending college due to the high cost associated with  college (Schmidt, 2003). 
To maintain some congruence, students conform their behavior to erroneous thoughts  such as lacking ability to succeed in college or feeling isolated (Bandura, 1986). The  ability to help students create positive images and capacities is critical to their ability to  reconstruct their self-image and change their behavior to assure success and achieve  their goals (Torres & Baxter Magolda, 2004). The subject credits the Columbian family  with assisting him in “learning how to argue and respect different opinions.” The 
Ohara 327 
Columbian family encouraged healthy debates, arguing and disagreements; it is how  the subject learned to think for himself and advocate for himself. The subject referred  to the “dinner arguments” on several occasions and discussed how he would read and  be prepared for the dinner debates. The subject would carry this practice into the class 
room; becoming more comfortable speaking up and voicing his opinion. 
Discussion and Significance of Findings 
This single case study examined the transition of a male first-generation Latino stu dent into the college environment. The study uncovered five themes: (1) Burst the  Bubble, (2) You Do You, (3) Support System In and Out of School, (4) Orientation:  Cultural and Academic, (5) Respect and Understanding. The issue is complicated  and there is not one model to prescribe success. Many data sources pointed to the  complexities of the being a first-generation male Latino college student; integrating  into a new environment, finding independence and breaking away from the tradi tional roles of their culture. Saenz et al. (2018) study emphasized the importance of  Latino mothers in their children’s academic success, this case placed emphasis on  relationships within the broader family unit and revealed interesting dynamics with  mentors and faculty. 
Based on these findings, the following recommendations are made regarding insti tutional policies, practices, and for future research. 
Continue to talk about the significant differences among races; commit to ongo ing programs across higher education that promote understanding of the nuances of  various cultures and backgrounds. Create platforms in the college community that  are not singular in nature but, instead are designed to be embedded in and part of the  college culture. Establish leadership forums celebrating the accomplishments of all  races, monthly celebrations of race and diversity, and tell stories of success across  the community. 
For example, findings of this study identified the need for connection with key  faculty members. Faculty can engage with the Latino population by being part of the  orientation process; engage from the beginning, create opportunities to meet in person  with family members and maintain a relationship throughout the student’s tenure at the  school. 
As stated by the subject, college orientation programs need to serve a larger com munity including teachers, administrators, and staff. Orientation should be more than  a programmatic requirement at a college. Student orientation should be an ongoing  process in and outside of the classroom. Administrative orientation can assist higher  education officers in understanding the barriers first-generation Latino students face  including the “bubble” and how it impacts a student’s integration into college, family  dynamics, and awareness of the struggles that the Latino student may be encountering  as they seek independence from their family. 
Faculty need to play a larger and more significant role in minority student retention;  mentoring should be part of faculty role expectations. Administration needs to 
328 Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 21(3) 
encourage faculty to interact and communicate outside the classroom; cultivating a  trusting relationship with the minority students has been found to have a positive effect  on retention and success. Faculty need to understand the valuable role they play in  Latino student retention. Educators need to “develop, reflect upon, and implement  action plans to explicitly support” learning communities and educators must “remain  attentive to possibilities of accountability.” (Knight-Manuel et al., 2019). 
Highlight Latino students that succeed, have overcome obstacles, and have a story  to tell. Encourage Latino students to be role models; tell their story. Latinos hear about  their counterparts who have not succeeded, switch the emphasis to those who have  finished college and accomplished their goals. Using the ongoing orientation model,  create communication strategies that highlight Latino students; using social media,  athletic events, and other forums popular to the college population. 
Create school campaigns or programs that emphasize the differences and highlight  the richness each individual contributes to the school environment. Recruiting initia tives, orientation programs, school activities; each should provide all students the  chance to participate and become immersed in the social culture. Create programming  to encourage Latino college graduates to explore careers in higher education; there are  too few Latinos represented in college faculty and staff. 
The research in this study, specifically around the retention of first-generation male  Latino students is not new; but the findings in this single-case study told a compelling  story and provide rich opportunity for further qualitative research. The educational  crisis is real, yet it remains ambiguous, undefined, and unnoticed in many policy con 
texts. Policies and practices need to be implemented to capitalize on the full potential  of Latino males, and in turn, ensure the long term viability of U.S. citizens and the  economy (Sáenz & Ponjuan, 2011). 
Explore in-depth, the families and mentors of the Latino students; uncover perspec tives, cultural phenomena and inspiration. Doing so, will provide valuable perspec tives and a more holistic view on how to better support Latino students. Conduct  longitudinal study of Latino males and their support system; examine the motivation  of the groups; did they remain close, did they all graduate? This information will high light important common or differentiating factors that attributed to their outcomes.  Compare the successes to the failures; did all successful graduating Latino males have  mentors, trusted inner-circles? Extend the same methodology that occurred as part of  this research to Latino students who have not succeeded in college in order to describe  their experience. 
Possible limitations to this study included case studies focus on a single unit, a  single instance, the issue of generalizability looms larger here than with other types of  qualitative research (Creswell, 2014). This method was chosen because one in-depth  case (n=1) provides rich and deep understanding of the subject and breakthrough  insights and/or has distinct, stand-out importance (Patton, 2015). 
Race is a personal and complex issue. This limitation was minimized through listen ing and empathy during the interview process. Responsive interviewing was utilized  (Rubin & Rubin, 2011).
Ohara 329 
Conclusion 
The Latino population is the fastest growing in the country. This rapid growth also  parallels a discouraging statistic that Latinos are the least likely to complete a col lege education. There have been many studies examining the retention issues that  plague the Latino community. These studies offer many perspectives and opinions.  This study focused on one young man; a first-generation Latino who despite obsta cles, has completed college. The study aimed to examine the factors that contributed  to his success and hopefully, provide new information that can assist college leaders  as they work to overcome the graduation gap of Latinos. The subject of this study  and the elite interviewees offered powerful insights to the cultural obstacles Latinos  face in college. Five themes emerged from this study; each tell a compelling story of  a young man with a maturing sense of self and a strong network of individuals com mitted to guiding him through his college experience. All these factors culminated  with a young man beating the percentages, graduating from college, and securing his  way to a dream career in baseball. 
The themes were thought provoking and can provide higher education leaders  deeper and more personal insights to understanding the obstacles and motivators for  young male Latinos entering college. College orientation programs can be more com prehensive, providing a longer, sustainable education to entire college populations.  Faculty plays a crucial role, in and outside the classroom, serving as advisors and men tors to the students; it is a big responsibility and needs to be taken seriously. If colleges  are to thrive in this rapidly changing environment, roles need to change, perceptions  need to broaden, and an overall shift in our thinking needs to occur. 
Declaration of Conflicting Interests 
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,  and/or publication of this article. 
Funding 
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of  this article. 
ORCID iD 
Elizabeth M. O’Hara https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9426-8723 
References 
Ayres, L., Kavanaugh, K., & Knafl, K. A. (2003). Within-case and across-case approaches to  qualitative data analysis. Qualitative Health Research, 13(6), 871–883. 
Bandura, A. (1986). The explanatory and predictive scope of self-efficacy theory. Journal of  Social and Clinical Psychology, 4(3), 359–373. 
Bell, J. D., & Bautsch, B. (2011). Improving Latino college completion: What state legislators  should know. National Conference for State Legislatures.
330 Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 21(3) 
Boyatzis, R. E. (1998). Transforming qualitative information: Thematic analysis and code  development. Sage. 
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods  approaches. Sage Publications. 
Crisp, G., Taggart, A., & Nora, A. (2015). Undergraduate Latina/o students: A systematic  review of research identifying factors contributing to academic success outcomes. Review  of Educational Research, 85(2), 249–274. 
Davis, D. J. (2008). Mentorship and the socialization of underrepresented minorities into  the professoriate: Examining varied influences. Mentoring & Tutoring: Partnership in  Learning, 16(3), 278–293. 
Dumas-Hines, F. A., Cochran, L. L., & Williams, E. U. (2001). Promoting diversity:  Recommendations for recruitment and retention of minorities in higher education. College  Student Journal, 35(3), 433–442. 
Pew. (2020). Education Levels of Recent Latino immigrants in the U.S. Reached New Highs  as of 2018. Author. Retrieved April 7, 2020, from https://www.pewresearch.org/fact tank/2020/04/07/education-levels-of-recent-latino-immigrants-in-the-u-s-reached-new highs-as-of-2018/ 
Fanon, F., Sartre, J. P., & Farrington, C. (1963). The wretched of the earth (Vol. 36). Grove  Press. 
The Pew Research Center. (2020). Five Facts about Latinos and Education. Author. Retrieved  July 28, 2016, from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/07/28/5-facts-about-lati nos-and-education/ 
Garcia, M. (2010). When hispanic students attempt to succeed in college, but do not. Community  College Journal of Research and Practice, 34(10), 839–847. 
Georgetown University. (2016). Retrieved from https://cew.georgetown.edu/wp-content/ uploads/PR_Latinos_Final.pdf 
Gloria, A. M., & Rodriguez, E. R. (2000). Counseling Latino University students:  Psychosociocultural issues for consideration. Journal of Counseling & Development, 78(2),  145–154. 
Gutiérrez, L., Yeakley, A., & Ortega, R. (2000). Educating students for social work with  Latinos: Issues for the new millennium. Journal of Social Work Education, 36(3),  541–557. 
Hernandez, T., & Morales, N. E. (1999). Career, culture, and compromise: Career development  experiences of Latinas working in higher education. The Career Development Quarterly,  48(1), 45–58 
Hines, E. M., Cooper, J. N., & Corral, M. (2019). Overcoming the odds: First-generation black  and Latino male collegians’ perspectives on pre-college barriers and facilitators. Journal  for Multicultural Education, 13(1), 51–69. 
Hurtado, S. (1994). The institutional climate for talented Latino students. Research in Higher  Education, 35(1), 21–41. 
Hurtado, S., Carter, D. F., & Spuler, A. (1996). Latino student transition to college: Assessing  difficulties and factors in successful college adjustment. Research in Higher Education,  37(2), 135–157. 
Hurtado, S., & Carter, D. F. (1997). Effects of college transition and perceptions of the cam pus racial climate on Latino college students’ sense of belonging. Sociology of Education,  70(4), 324–345. 
Keefe, S. E., & Padilla, A. M. (1987). Chicano ethnicity. Vnr Ag.
Ohara 331 
Knight-Manuel, M. G., Marciano, J. E., Wilson, M., Jackson, I., Vernikoff, L., Zuckerman, K.  G., & Watson, V. W. (2019). “It’s all possible”: Urban educators’ perspectives on creating  a culturally relevant, schoolwide, college-going culture for black and Latino male students.  Urban Education, 54(1), 35–64. 
Knoche, L. L., & Zamboanga, B. L. (2006). College student mentors and Latino youth: A quali tative study of the mentoring relationship. The Qualitative Report, 11(1), 138–160. Kvale, S., & Brinkmann, S. (2009). Interviews: Learning the craft of qualitative research  interviewing. Sage Publications. 
Llamas, J. D., & Morgan Consoli, M. (2012). The importance of familia for Latina/o college  students: Examining the role of familial support in intragroup marginalization. Cultural  Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 18(4), 395. 
Lichtman, M. (2010). Understanding and evaluating qualitative educational research. Sage  Publications. 
Lincoln, Y. G., & Guba, E. (1985). E. 1985. Naturalistic inquiry. London, Sage Publications.  Contextualization: Evidence from distributed teams. Information Systems Research, 16(1),  9–27. 
Marin, G., & Marin, B. V. (1991). Research with hispanic populations. Sage Publications, Inc. MLR. (2015). Monthly Labor Review. U.S. Dept. of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. National Center for Educational Statistics. (2014). The condition of education 2014. Author.  
Retrieved March 3, 2020 from https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2016/2016005.pdf Niemann, Y. F., Romero, A. J., Arredondo, J., & Rodriguez, V. (1999). What does it mean to  be “mexican”? Social construction of an ethnic identity. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral  Sciences, 21(1), 47–60. 
Niemann, Y. F., Romero, A., & Arbona, C. (2000). Effects of cultural orientation on the percep tion of conflict between relationship and education goals for Mexican American college  students. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 22(1), 46–63. 
Nora, A., & Crisp, G. (2009). Hispanics and higher education: An overview of research, the ory, and practice. In Higher education: Handbook of theory and research (pp. 317–353).  Springer, Dordrecht. 
Olivas, M. A. (1997). Research on Latino college students: A theoretical framework and inquiry.  Latinos and Education: A Critical Reader, 468–486. 
Patrón, O. E. (2020). “The revolution begins at home:” exploring educational aspirations  between Latino male collegians and their families through a reciprocity of relationships.  International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 33(4), 446–464. 
Patton, M. Q., & Cochran, M. (2002). A guide to using qualitative research methodology. Patton, M. Q. (2015). Qualitative research and methods: Integrating theory and practice. Sage  Publications. 
Phillips, L. T., Stephens, N. M., Townsend, S. S., & Goudeau, S. (2020). Access is not enough:  Cultural mismatch persists to limit first-generation students’ opportunities for achievement  throughout college. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 119(5), 1112–1131. 
Rendon, L. I., Jalomo, R. E., & Nora, A. (2000). Theoretical considerations in the study of  minority student retention in higher education. Reworking the Student Departure Puzzle,  1, 127–156. 
Reyes, N. A. S., & Nora, A. (2012). Lost among the data: A review of Latino first genera tion college students. White paper prepared for the Hispanic Association of Colleges and  Universities. Author. Retrieved March 25, 2020 from http://www.hacu.net/hacu/H3ERC_ Research_Initiative.asp. 
Rubin, H. J., & Rubin, I. S. (2011). Qualitative interviewing: The art of hearing data. Sage.
332 Journal of Hispanic Higher Education 21(3) 
Saenz, V. B., Drake, A. P., Garcia-Louis, C., Ryu, W. J., & Ponjuan, L. (2018). Conceptualizing  Latina/o College-Going Behavior in High School. Journal of College Access, 4(1), 20–39. Sáenz, V. B., & Ponjuan, L. (2011). Men of color: Ensuring the academic success of Latino  males in higher education. Institute for Higher Education Policy. 
Sanford, N. (1966). Self and society: Social change and individual development. Atherton. Santiago, D., Laurel, J., Martinez, J., Bonilla, C., & Labandera, E. (2019). Latinos in higher  education: Compilation of fast facts. Excelencia in Education. 
Santiago, D. A. (2011). Roadmap for ensuring America’s future by increasing Latino college  completion. Excelencia in Education (NJ1). 
Santiago, D. A., Kienzl, G. S., Sponsler, B. A., & Bowles, A. (2010). Ensuring America’s  future: Federal policy and Latino college completion. Excelencia in Education. Schmidt, P. (2003). Academe’s Hispanic future: The nation’s largest minority group faces big  obstacles in higher education, and colleges struggle to find the right way to help. Chronicle  of Higher Education, 50, 14. 
Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Sage. 
Stake, R. E. (2005). Qualitative case studies. (pp. 443–466). The Sage handbook of qualitative  research (3rd ed.). Sage Publications. 
Stake, R. E. (2013). Multiple case study analysis. Guilford Press. 
Stein, G. L., Rivas-Drake, D., & Camacho, T. C. (2017). Ethnic identity and familism among  Latino college students: A test of prospective associations. Emerging Adulthood, 5(2),  106–115. 
Stone, A. N., Serrata, C., & Martinez, K. (2020). Small town values: exploring the values of  latina college students from rural communities. Journal of Latinos and Education, 1–13.  https://doi.org/10.1080/15348431.2020.1727745 
Suarez, S. A., Fowers, B. J., Garwood, C. S., & Szapocznik, J. (1997). Biculturalism, dif ferentness, loneliness, and alienation in Hispanic college students. Hispanic Journal of  Behavioral Sciences, 19(4), 489–505. 
Thayer, P. B. (2003). Retention of students from first generation and low income backgrounds.  Department of Education, Washington D.C. 
Tinto, V. (1997). Classrooms as communities: Exploring the educational character of student  persistence. Journal of Higher Education, 68(6), 599–623. 
Torres, V., & Baxter Magolda, M. B. (2004). Reconstructing Latino identity: The influence of  cognitive development on the ethnic identity process of Latino students. Journal of College  Student Development, 45(3), 333–347. 
Yin, R. K. (2013). Case study research: Design and methods. Sage Publications. 
Author Biography 
Elizabeth M. O’Hara is an assistant professor of managment & marketing in the Grenon  School of Business at Assumption University in Worcester, Massachusetts. She is the director  of the sport management program and oversees partnership development for the university.
