
Sociological Forum, Vol. 35, No. 3, September 2020 
DOI: 10.1111/socf.12617 
© 2020 Eastern Sociological Society
Navigating the First Year of College: Siblings, Parents, and First-Generation Students’ Experiences1 
Josipa Roksa,2 Blake R. Silver,3 Denise Deutschlander,4 and Sarah E. Whitley5 
Although college education is a key to upward mobility, students from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds are less likely to enter and complete college than their more advantaged peers. Prior literature has illuminated how cultural capital contributes to these disparities. An alternative conceptualization of cul tural capital, however, suggests that it can also play a role in social mobility. In this study, we build on and extend the literature on cultural mobility by proposing that exposure to education can benefit not only indi viduals but also families. We examine the influence of older siblings who attended college on the experiences of younger college-going siblings in families where neither parent has completed college (i.e., first-generation families). We find that students rarely rely on their older siblings as sources of information and advice, except in a few instances where older siblings attended the same institution. However, both the topics and nature of conversations between parents and students differ between families with and without older college educated siblings. The primary benefit of having college-educated siblings is thus related to students’ engage ment with and support received from parents. These findings have important implications for cultural capital research and understanding experiences of first-generation college students. 
KEYWORDS: cultural capital; family; first generation; higher education; inequality; siblings. 
INTRODUCTION 
College education is a key to upward mobility (Brand and Xie 2010; Torche 2011), but students from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds are less likely to enter and complete college than their more advantaged peers (Bailey and Dynarski 2011; Bowen et al. 2009; Cataldi et al. 2018).6 Although myriad factors contribute to these inequalities (Arum et al. 2018; Engle and Tinto 2008; Grodsky and Jackson 2009), much sociological research has focused on the role of cultural capital, conceptualized as famil iarity with the expectations, norms, and procedures of social institutions such as schools. Students from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds have less knowledge 
1 The last two authors were at the University of Virginia while actively involved in the project and have pursued careers outside of academia since. 2 Department of Sociology, University of Virginia, P.O. Box 400766, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904; e-mail: jroksa@virginia.edu 3 Department of Sociology and Anthropology, George Mason University, 4400 University Drive, MSN 1F4, Fairfax, Virginia 22030; e-mail: bsilver@gmu.edu 4 Department of Sociology, University of Virginia, P.O. Box 400766, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904; e-mail: dd4cf@virginia.edu 5 Curry School of Education and Human Development, University of Virginia, PO Box 400265, Char lottesville, Virginia 22904; e-mail: sew4dq@virginia.edu 6 When reviewing the literature, we use the term socioeconomic background in order to encompass a 
broad range of related studies considering different dimensions of socioeconomic background, includ ing parental education, family income, and composite class indicators (e.g., middle class vs. working class). 
565 
566 Roksa et al.
about the college application process (Cabrera and La Nasa 2001; Lareau 2011) and ways to navigate higher education institutions (Armstrong and Hamilton 2013; Stuber 2009). Inspired by Bourdieu’s (1973; see also Bourdieu and Passeron 1977) work, this re search describes how cultural capital contributes to the reproduction of socioeconomic inequality. 
An alternative approach proposed by DiMaggio (1982) conceptualizes cultural capital as a potential vehicle of mobility. In this framework, cultural capital can be acquired later in life, especially in schools, and benefit students from socioeconomi cally disadvantaged backgrounds. Several recent studies have illuminated how both students (Bueker 2019; Jack 2016, 2019) and parents who enroll in college as adults (Attewell and Lavin 2007; Domina and Roksa 2012) can acquire cultural capital through exposure to particular educational experiences. These studies, however, have focused primarily on individuals and how they change in response to their own educational experiences. In this study, we propose conceptualizing cultural capital as a resource that not only belongs to individuals but also resides within families—what we term “family cultural capital”. This conceptualization implies that the experiences of a given family member may shape other family members’ familiarity with social institutions, as opposed to being consequential only for the individual. 
To consider this possibility, we examine the influence of older siblings who attended college on the experiences of younger college-going siblings in families where neither parent has completed college (i.e., first-generation families). Prior studies have suggested that siblings play an important role in transferring infor mation and helping first-generation students with the college application process (e.g., Ceja 2006; Kim and Gasman 2011). We extend this work by examining the role of siblings during the first year of college. Akin to the college applica tion phase, we expected that siblings would have a direct influence on students’ experiences by sharing valuable information and strategies for navigating the college environment. In addition, if cultural capital resides within families, not just individuals, watching older siblings go through college could change par ents’ (as well as younger siblings’) understandings of college and their engage ment with each other. 
Based on interviews with 35 first-generation students, we find that siblings do not play much of a direct role in students’ efforts to navigate higher education after college entry. They are not mentioned as sources of information or advice, except when they attended the same institution. However, having an older college-edu cated sibling is associated with a different pattern of engagement with parents. Both the topics and nature of conversations between parents and students differ notably in families with college-educated siblings. In addition to offering important insights on first-generation students’ college experiences, these findings point to the value of conceptualizing cultural capital as residing within families as opposed to only indi viduals. In this broader conceptualization of “family cultural capital,” experiences of other family members—not just one’s own experience—can enhance one’s famil iarity with and ability to navigate social institutions. 
Navigating the First Year of College 567
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Cultural Reproduction and Cultural Mobility 
Cultural capital presents a valuable framework for understanding inequality in college access and success. This form of capital typically refers to an individual’s familiarity with particular forms of culture, and in educational contexts, it has been conceptualized as familiarity with the expectations, norms, and procedures of edu cational institutions (Bourdieu 1973; Bourdieu and Passeron 1977; see a review in Lareau and Weininger 2003). Although the cultural capital literature has focused more extensively on K–12 education, recent studies have described ways in which cultural capital shapes students’ access to and success in college. 
Much higher education literature examines the role of information in apply ing to college. The more students and parents know about college, the higher the likelihood of enrolling in college (Kim and Schneider 2005; Plank and Jordan 2001). Students from socioeconomically disadvantaged families have less informa tion regarding this transition (Cabrera and La Nasa 2001; Deutschlander 2017; Lareau 2011) and are more likely to forgo college or attend an institution of lower selectivity than they are academically prepared to attend (Bowen et al. 2009; Rod erick et al. 2011; Roksa and Deutschlander 2018). 
Challenges persist after college entry. Students from socioeconomically disad vantaged backgrounds have difficulties navigating college coursework and under standing faculty expectations (Collier and Morgan 2008) as well as engaging and communicating with faculty (Kim and Sax 2009). They are less likely to join extracurricular groups or participate in specific learning experiences, such as study abroad or faculty-mentored research opportunities (Stuber 2011; Wilbur and Ros cigno 2016). More generally, they encounter obstacles as they try to identify and navigate pathways through college and locate opportunities for personal and pro fessional development (Armstrong and Hamilton 2013; Godsoe 2018). Overall, stu dents from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds are less likely to be socially and academically engaged during college (Lohfink and Paulsen 2005; Pas carella et al. 2004). 
These studies show how cultural capital contributes to the reproduction of socioeconomic inequality. But there is an alternative conceptualization that high lights an association between cultural capital and social mobility (e.g., Bueker 2019; DiMaggio 1982, Domina and Roksa 2012; Jack 2016, 2019; Roksa and Potter 2011). Studies of socioeconomically disadvantaged students who have been exposed to middle-class or elite educational environments show that they can acquire fam iliarity with those environments. Jack (2016, 2019) found that socioeconomically disadvantaged students who attended boarding, day, and preparatory high schools entered an elite university already familiar with the norms and procedures of that setting. They knew what office hours were, how to engage with faculty and peers, and how to advocate for themselves. Even though Jack (2016, 2019) did not explic itly specify the mechanisms through which exposure to elite high schools prepared students for success at an elite college, the examples provided point to a few possibilities, including: students acquiring knowledge about the norms of elite 
568 Roksa et al.
educational settings, becoming comfortable engaging with peers from more advan taged backgrounds, and gaining confidence that they can succeed in this new environment. 
Bueker (2019) described similar findings from a study of low- and middle-in come women of color who attended an advantaged, predominantly white high school named Mayfair. In addition to being exposed to new norms and behaviors, the author proposed two additional mechanisms that may contribute to students’ subsequent success: straddling boundaries and confidence. Students with exposure to this new environment described how it allowed them to be comfortable across a range of social contexts noting that “I can go to a 5 star restaurant and then I can go to Burger King. It’s awesome and Mayfair definitely taught me that” (10). Other recent research lends support to this insight, showing how different high school experiences shape students’ abilities to navigate peer networks in college and cross racial boundaries (Johnson 2019). In addition, Bueker (2019) found that students who attended Mayfair built their self-confidence. Talking about the benefits of attending that school, one student noted, “Honestly, it’s probably my confidence and just the willpower to believe in yourself” (20). 
Exposure to education, and higher education in particular, can also change the understandings and practices of parents who pursue higher education as adults. For example, Domina and Roksa (2012) reported that mothers who enrolled in higher education after the birth of their children adopted parenting practices more closely aligned with the middle-class parenting style of concerted cultivation (see Lareau 2011). Other research examining the causal impact of college has similarly shown that exposure to higher education can change parenting practices (e.g., Attewell and Lavin 2007; Carneiro et al. 2007). Attewell and Lavin (2007) proposed two mecha nisms through which education could alter parenting practices: knowledge and role models. Exposure to higher education can alter mothers’ knowledge about the norms and expectations of educational institutions, which can influence how they engage with their own children. In addition, parenting behavior can change in response to observing behaviors and attitudes of more socioeconomically advan taged peers and adopting some of their approaches. 
These studies provide invaluable insights into how exposure to education can alter individuals’ cultural capital, shaping their familiarity with educational institu tions and ability to successfully navigate them. We extend this work by considering whether exposure to higher education can alter perceptions and practices of other family members, not just the individuals attending college. Siblings provide an ideal context for addressing this possibility as their experiences may not only contribute to their own knowledge and dispositions but also potentially those of their parents and younger siblings. Although we focus on siblings, one can imagine other applica tions of this concept, such as spouses benefiting from each other’s exposure to higher education, or other contexts in which the cultural knowledge of one member of the family may be relevant for the mutual engagement and experiences of other members. 
Navigating the First Year of College 569Siblings, Family, and College Success 
A few qualitative studies of students from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds have noted the importance of siblings in the college choice process. In a study of first-generation Chicana students, Ceja (2006) reported that older siblings who attended college set a tradition of attendance for younger siblings, provided useful information during the choice process, were influential in career decision making, and assisted in navigating language and information barriers with parents (see also Elias McAllister 2012; Kim and Gasman 2011). Students also begin the college search process earlier when they have older siblings who attended college, and older siblings can take on a parental role in terms of providing information and support (Kaczynski 2012). Receiving information about college attendance from older siblings can help students to envision themselves as “family pioneers” who will go to college (Langenkamp and Shifrer 2018). A recent quantitative study utilizing data on 1.6 million sibling pairs of SAT takers found that younger siblings are more likely to enroll in college, as well as at a more selective college, when older siblings have preceded them (Goodman et al. 2015). 
While siblings are a crucial source of information and support during the col lege application process, the question remains whether they can also help students navigate college after entry. Having gone to college provides one with valuable information and resources that could be shared with younger siblings—from experi ences with academic challenges and seeking academic support, to navigating the social scene and finding friends. However, there are also reasons to expect that the patterns observed during the college-choice process may not hold after students enroll in college. During the application phase, students primarily need access to what Deutschlander (2017) termed specific cultural capital, or knowledge and infor mation tailored to that transition (e.g., taking college entrance exams, filling out college applications, and being aware of financial aid). Although siblings may apply to different institutions, many college applications are quite similar, especially with the adoption of the Common App. Furthermore, just knowing that financial aid is available can shape the college search process (Cabrera and La Nasa 2000; Grodsky and Jones 2007). 
College success, on the other hand, is less about discrete pieces of knowledge and more about the overall ability to understand the college environment and find suitable pathways through it. Succeeding in college necessitates long-term planning and continuous investments, as well as concurrent navigation of both academic and social worlds (Armstrong and Hamilton 2013). In the college environment, it is not enough to possess cultural capital; individuals need to activate it in interactions within specific school settings (Lareau and Horvat 1999). For instance, knowing that one should interact with faculty is different from being able to effectively do so. An opportunity to observe other students engage in particular activities and prac tices may be more helpful than receiving verbal instructions and encouragement from siblings. Thus, older siblings’ ability to directly shape the behaviors of college students may be constrained. 
Even though older siblings may have limited direct influence on students’ experi ences in higher education, their college attendance may have another benefit: having 
570 Roksa et al.
an older sibling attend college may change interactions between students and their parents and the overall amount of support students receive. We expect that the mech anisms through which this could occur mirror those described in prior research regarding the benefits of educational exposure for individuals. First, having a child experience college may expose parents (as well as younger siblings) to information about the norms and expectations of higher education. Some of the knowledge may be acquired by attending college orientation or family weekend and receiving newsletters or emails from the institution. The experience of having a child in college can also expose parents to new insights, such as the likelihood that students will struggle academically even if they did well in high school and that extracurricular activities are a part of college life. 
This new understanding of college may in part lead to a second mechanism: having experienced one child going through college, parents may be better able to straddle boundaries between their home environments and their children’s college worlds. College students from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds often face the challenge of reconciling their home and school environments and sustaining relationships with their families (Lee and Kramer 2013; Lehmann 2014; Rondini 2016). They may experience conflict with parents or siblings who are not upwardly mobile (Curl et al. 2018), sometimes coming to view them as failures or cautionary tales (Langenkamp and Shifrer 2018; Rondini 2018). Having one child go through college may lessen the distance between home and school, allowing parents to more readily engage when their second child is in college. 
Finally, following Bueker’s (2019) insights, parents who experienced one child go through college may gain confidence in their ability to support other children who subsequently pursue higher education. This may engender greater engagement and more conversations with students, which may in turn lead students to perceive their parents as being more supportive. A number of recent studies show that paren tal support is an important component of student success in higher education (e.g., DeBerard et al. 2004; Strom and Savage 2014). Notably, when students from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds perceive their parents as supportive, they are more likely to engage with faculty and peers as well as report greater psy chological well-being (Roksa et al. 2020; Roksa and Kinsley 2019). 
To consider these possibilities, we examine conversations between college stu dents and their parents. Lareau (2011) conceptualized parent-student discussion as one of the key elements of parenting and a reflection of cultural capital (see also Engberg and Allen 2011; Plank and Jordan 2001; Roksa and Deutschlander 2018). A recent study using a randomized controlled trial showed that when socioeconomi cally disadvantaged parents were provided with information about college, they were more likely to talk to their children about engaging with faculty and staff, and students were more likely to change their attitudes about help seeking (Deutsch lander 2019). Examining how parents and college students communicate and what they talk about can thus offer a window into their cultural capital, capturing their understandings of college and familiarity with the norms and expectations of higher education. 
Navigating the First Year of College 571DATA AND METHODS 
This study is based on in-depth interviews with 35 first-generation students in their first year at a highly selective public institution on the East Coast. Challenges associated with the transition to higher education for students from socioeconomi cally disadvantaged backgrounds are particularly pronounced at selective institu tions (Aries and Seider 2005; Mullen 2010), making this a compelling context for understanding whether and how siblings can play a role in students’ experiences. Moreover, focusing on the first year is warranted given that first-year experiences are central to students’ subsequent experiences and outcomes (e.g., Astin 1993; Mayhew et al. 2016). 
This research was part of a larger study wherein all first-generation (neither parent has completed a four-year college degree) and low-income (at or below the 200% poverty threshold) students were invited to participate in a survey regarding their college experiences in the spring of their first year. Sixty-one percent of stu dents responded to the survey (n = 261). To select interviewees among students who completed the survey, we stratified the sample by race/ethnicity, gender, and degree of parental support (high/low based on a scale included in the survey). We aimed to interview a similar number of women and men as well as underrepresented racial/ ethnic minority (URM, including African American and Latinx) and white stu dents, and to observe students across a spectrum of family support. Students were randomly selected from family support/gender/race categories until we reached the desired number of participants. 
Among interview participants, 35 students (78%) were first generation and 10 (22%) were low-income but not first generation. The latter group was excluded given our interest in exploring the role of siblings in shaping experiences of students and families without direct college knowledge (i.e., without college education).7 Moreover, 16 students (46%) were from URM groups (11 identified as African American, 4 as Latinx, and 1 as multiracial, African American and Latinx) and 19 were white. Seventeen participants (49%) identified as women. 
Furthermore, students were asked in the survey whether they had a sibling who enrolled in college before their own enrollment. For those who responded affirma tively, we also inquired whether the sibling attended the same institution. Fifteen students (43%) had at least one older sibling with college experience (referred to as a college-educated sibling). Among the 20 students without a college-educated sib ling, 8 were the only child in their family. Six URM students (38%) and 9 white students (47%) had college-educated siblings. All participants were assigned a pseu donym to maintain confidentiality. 
The interviews were conducted by three members of the research team and lasted on average approximately 75 minutes. Students who participated received a $25 gift card. The interview guide was semistructured, featuring a series of open ended questions related to students’ first-year transition, including their transition to college, academic and social challenges, approaches to help seeking, and family 
7 Since the information about first-generation status was provided by the institution as a dummy variable (yes/no), we do not have more fine-grained information regarding parents’ educational experiences. 
572 Roksa et al.
involvement. The interviews were digitally recorded, transcribed, and uploaded to the electronic coding platform Dedoose for analysis. 
Data analysis relied on a combination of inductive and deductive approaches. First, all transcripts were coded using open coding methods to identify themes emerging from the data (Corbin and Strauss 2008). Drawing from this preliminary coding, a series of closed codes were developed and deployed in a second round of coding (Emerson et al. 1995). These codes were deductively applied to hone in on students’ experiences with familial engagement during their first year of college. Finally, we compared codes for students with and without college-educated siblings to assess similarities and differences between the two groups. 
In addition, given extensive literature on the role of familial support for college students from traditionally underrepresented racial/ethnic minority backgrounds (e.g., Dennis et al. 2005; Gloria and Castellanos 2003; Guiffrida 2005, Hurtado et al. 1996; Rodriguez et al. 2003; Solberg and Villareal 1997), we considered whether the observed patterns varied by race/ethnicity. Much of this research has highlighted the role of familial support for Latinx students. For example, Rodriguez and colleagues (2003) showed that family support was important for the psychologi cal well-being of Latinx students, while Dennis and colleagues (2005) noted that lacking support and understanding from family had a negative relationship to col lege adjustment, commitment, and GPA. One may thus expect that the benefits of having college-educated siblings would be amplified for URM students. We found no variation along this dimension. This null finding may reflect in part the highly selective institutional context and/or the limited analytical power resulting from a small number of students in the sample. The sample size also prevents us from dis aggregating the URM group to consider the experiences of Latinx and African American students separately, which is particularly important to address in future research. 
RESULTS 
Sibling Involvement During the First Year8 
First-generation students readily recalled experiencing both academic and social challenges during their transition to college. Grades were a common issue, wherein students did not perform as well academically as they expected. Other chal lenges identified by students related to time management, course or major selection, and class participation. When asked how they addressed academic challenges, one of the most common responses was that they simply studied harder or modified their study strategies. At times, first-generation students also talked to friends or 
8 Many participants mentioned that siblings were a source of both inspiration and information when they were applying to college and deciding where to attend. These findings corroborate prior research regarding college choice (e.g., Ceja 2006; Kim and Gasman 2011). We do not elaborate on those find ings given that they are already described in the literature and instead focus on the role of siblings after students enter college. 
Navigating the First Year of College 573
sought university resources (such as tutoring), but almost none of them mentioned talking to siblings when contending with these challenges. 
Similarly, students discussed a number of social challenges, such as finding friends, becoming involved in extracurricular activities that fit their interests, navi gating conflict in their residence halls, and feeling excluded on campus. Responding to these challenges, a few students resolved to focus exclusively on academics, giving up on social engagement. Most first-generation students endeavored to work through these challenges, whether by trying to be more outgoing or seeking advice from their peers. Almost none of them, however, discussed engaging their siblings in resolving these dilemmas. 
Although most students did not receive advice about navigating the transition to college from older siblings, there were a few notable exceptions. These students had something in common: their older siblings attended the same institution. When Nylah, an African American female student, needed advice about choosing a major, her sister connected her to Dr. Jones, a former advisor with whom she had a close relationship.9 Nylah noted, “I needed a lot of advice, especially as a first-year stu dent, so I reached out to my sister a lot, and then Dr. Jones.” When she started to struggle academically, she turned to Dr. Jones again: 
I was used to receiving A’s, and then I got a B in college. I was just like, “This is so hard. How do I deal with this? Is anybody else in the same position?” I felt like a bad grade kind of defined me.... I talked to Dr. Jones when I was at a low point, and she kind of directed me in the right direction—to talk to professors, go to office hours, and just try to see how you can change it. 
In a similar fashion, Santiago, a Latinx male student, described learning about higher education and how to navigate the university from his older brothers: 
None of my family has ever gone to college, so it’s pretty overwhelming, all this stuff that I still don’t know what to do. My brothers are kind of teaching me what they’ve learned and what they wish they would have done their first year.... My brothers, they’ve already gone through most of it. They’re helping me go through it. 
For Nylah and Santiago, having older siblings who attended the same institu tion, and thus knew how to navigate the specific context and direct students to specific contacts, made a difference. 
Siblings and Parental Engagement 
Building on and extending the cultural mobility literature, we also suggested that siblings may shape engagement between parents and students and influence the ways parents support their children in college. To consider this possibility, we com pared students who had an older sibling with college experience (referred to as a col lege-educated sibling) with those who did not, examining how they discussed engagement with parents and the support they received from them. This analysis revealed both commonalities among all first-generation students and differences between students with and without college-educated siblings. 
9 Race/ethnicity and gender are included only at the first mention of each respondent. 
574 Roksa et al.Parents Are Generally Supportive but Often Lack Specific Information 
Regardless of whether they had college-educated siblings, all first-generation students described their parents as generally emotionally supportive (see also Auer bach 2006; Gofen 2009; Roksa and Silver 2019). For instance, Ethan, a white male student, who did not have any siblings, described his mother as “a rock, an emo tional rock for me.” Annie, a white female student, whose three older siblings attended college, noted that her parents had been supportive as she struggled with college adjustment: 
I was not in a good place mentally.... [My parents] were there. My dad came. He came twice I think in one week. I was just like, “Dad, I need to not be in my room. I need to be off campus. I need to separate myself.” They definitely put me as a priority when I need them to. 
These quotes are representative of a widespread perception that parents were a crucial source of emotional support during the transition into college. Although emotionally supportive, parents could rarely offer concrete guidance during the first-year transition. First-generation students with and without college educated siblings acknowledged the limits of their parents’ knowledge regarding higher education. For example, Sofia, a Latinx female student who did not have older siblings said, “Coming in as a first-generation student, I didn’t have the sup port of knowing how to network and knowing how to balance classes from my par ents.” Luis, a Latinx male student, whose older brother attended college, described his parents’ understanding of higher education in a similar way: “They don’t really know the college experience. They don’t really know what it’s like. . . .” 
Talking About Academics, Especially at Times of Struggle 
First-generation students, regardless of whether they had college-educated sib lings, often engaged with their parents about academics. However, the topics and nature of those conversations differed depending on whether they had college-edu cated siblings. For first-generation students who did not have an older sibling with college experience, discussions with parents were often limited or cursory, and fre quently focused on grades. For instance, Imani, an African American female stu dent, said, “My parents never really ask what I’m learning. They mostly ask about my grades, rather than what I’m actually learning.” Likewise, describing the way his parents asked about academics, Ethan said, “‘How is it going? Good grades?’ That’s about it.” Mateo, a Latinx male student, noted that his mother often asked, “How is school going?” but he offered short responses as he believed her question was “almost a formality ... something she picked up from TV roles of mothers talk ing to their children.” 
Students who did not have college-educated siblings noted that their conversa tions with parents were often constrained. Daniel, a white male student, said, 
I think we tried not to talk about classes. [My parents] just like to know how I’m doing overall. Partially, because I don’t think they themselves fully understand that getting a 60 in chemistry is really good. That’s like a B+ or something. For them, they’re like, “You’re failing.” No, I’m actually like to [the top] 10% of my class right now. 
Navigating the First Year of College 575
Perceiving that his parents lacked familiarity with specific aspects of college— such as grading on a curve—Daniel set limits on the depth of their conversations about academics. 
These patterns contrast with the responses of students with college-educated siblings. Although grades were often a focus for students without college-educated siblings, students whose older siblings attended college recounted more holistic con versations with parents about academics. For instance, Charlotte, a white female student, described typical discussions with her parents by saying, “Yeah it’s like never about grades and stuff. It’s like, ‘How do you like your classes? Are you learn ing anything interesting? How are your professors? Have you gotten to know any of them?’” Similarly, Elizabeth, a white female student, recalled her parents asking, 
“How are you liking this? What do you think about this? What are you getting?” They never ask me about grades.... Usually [their response] is positive like, “Yeah, that sounds really great,” or “What would you learn in that?” Usually it’s support of what I’m taking [rather] than a feedback-type thing. 
And Sasha, an African American female student, offered one of the most elo quent accounts of parental engagement with respect to academics: 
[My mom] will ask me, “How are your classes going,” said exactly that way. By that, I don’t really even think she expects me to tell her my grades. She just seeks my evaluation of how I feel I’m doing. I’ll be like, “Eh, I’m good.” Or if a class is going bad, I’m like, “Not doing too great, but . . .” I always throw that “but” in there so she knows I’m trying. She’s never ultra specific in her questions. I might tell her the names of my professors, and she’ll be like, “Why do you like said professor? What do they talk about?” ... In my religion class, we read an arti cle about environmental injustice and racism and how they’re sometimes combined. It was a short article, so I sent her that article to read for herself. Stuff like that is what we do. My mom is a big reader. If she doesn’t understand something, if I can find reading on it, she’s got it just like that. She reads everything.... We talked about [the article]. It was cool. We analyzed it. She was like, “Wow, that was a good point.” I was like, “I know, right?” 
Students with college-educated siblings emphasized that their conversations with parents were rarely about grades and instead focused on specific professors, classroom experiences, and what they were learning. 
Navigating Academic Challenges 
Differences between students with college-educated siblings and those without were even more pronounced when it came to discussing academic challenges. For students without college-educated siblings, parents’ lack of familiarity with the aca demic realm of higher education made it difficult to seek parental support when obstacles arose. When asked whether they would approach their parents to discuss academic challenges, students in this group were hesitant. 
After describing how her parents tended to focus on grades rather than learn ing, noted above, Imani revealed her reluctance to engage her parents for support with academic challenges: 
I don’t really talk about my grades when they’re not where I want them to be at.... Like I didn’t tell [my parents] about how bad I did on my first biology exam—because I take biology part two now—but I told them once I did well on this [more recent] exam. 
576 Roksa et al.
Similarly, Lauren, a white female student who was struggling in her physics course, described being hesitant to disclose those challenges to her parents: 
I’m very independent, so if I do have a problem, it could be me not wanting [my parents] to know that I had a problem or I didn’t do well on a test or I can’t figure something out. I don’t want to bring it up to them if I am dealing with something really hard.... They also expect me to do really well. My parents are, I don’t want to say they expect a lot of me, but they know what I am capable of; they know that I am intelligent, they expect the same level of consis tency.... If they ask about it, I’ll answer, but I’m definitely not one to text them and be like, “I just failed my physics exam.” 
By contrast, students whose older siblings attended college appeared to be more comfortable approaching their parents when they encountered obstacles to their academic success. Elizabeth described how one of her most significant chal lenges during the first year was choosing a major. She recounted ongoing conversa tions with her mother as she worked to make a decision: “I’m undecided in major choice. I had some ideas coming in, but it’s a little bit shifting right now. So I’m just staying in touch with [my mother], telling her when I have updates about what I’m thinking about majoring in.” Elizabeth’s mother encouraged her to take steps toward finding a major that fit with her interests and provided feedback and encour agement along the way. She described keeping her mother informed about each part of the process: 
[Our conversations] are like, “I’m meeting with this person today to talk; I’ll let you know.” I took a picture of some of the classes I’m going to be taking next semester, what I’ll be explor ing, what are my different options. Telling her why I’m interested in what. 
Similarly, Jordan, an African American female student, noted that when she encountered challenges with some of her classes, her mother encouraged her to “talk to your professor” and seek guidance on how to improve her academic performance. 
Sasha, whose mother was particularly engaged in what she was learning, described approaching her mother for support when she struggled with her class: “Mostly, I would talk about [struggling in] a class, and she would say, ‘Well, can you get tutored?’ That was a good idea, because I ended up getting a tutor for that class.” Although Sasha—like most of the first-generation students—perceived that her parents were not always well informed about higher education, she acknowl edged the way her mother offered specific kinds of advice such as getting a tutor. She went on to describe how her parents were involved in working through chal lenges in a “problem-solution” way. She noted that her parents would say things like, “Here’s your problem, Sasha. Maybe you should try talking to this person.” 
Open dialogue about academic engagement also allowed students with college educated siblings to channel the emotional support provided by their parents to cope with specific challenges. For example, Luis described talking to his parents about college courses, including 
about how they’re different from high school.... In high school you have an outline ... you need to know this, this, and this for the standardized test at the end of the year. That’s all you’re held accountable for. Here, I feel like it’s more of the teachers hand you the books and they’re like, “Read and be ready for the test.” That’s what I’ve told my parents, and they just tell me, “Stick it out, and try to do your best. It will eventually work out. You’ll get used to it.” I feel like I have gotten used to it. 
Navigating the First Year of College 577
Likewise, Santiago described being comfortable approaching his mother when academic struggles came up, noting that she was adept at offering encouragement in these situations: 
I’ve been getting some bad grades that I never got in high school. I would always go to my mom for that and my mom just always reassures me. That’s one of the topics of our conversa tions usually.... She would always say that I’m here for a reason, that I’ve worked so hard, that everybody here understands why I’m here, to just relax, how special me and my brothers are that we’re here because nobody in our family is doing this. 
These quotes illustrate the ways students with college-educated siblings felt comfortable keeping dialogue open with their parents and were able to approach them for support when academic difficulties emerged. Parents in these circum stances offered emotional support when students needed it most (at times of chal lenge), and some parents led students through the problem-solving process and suggested specific behaviors (such as seeking tutors or talking with professors). 
Talking About the Social: Extracurriculars and Partying as Part of College Life 
Differences between students with and without college-educated siblings were also pronounced with respect to social involvement. Prior research has described socioeconomically disadvantaged students as being more focused on academics and less inclined to pursue “the college experience” in terms of extensive social engage ment, whether in extracurricular activities or the party scene (Armstrong and Hamilton 2013; Stuber 2011). Similarly, students in our study who did not have col lege-educated siblings described their parents as placing little emphasis on social and extracurricular activities. For example, Maxim, a white male student, said, “[My mom] asked a few times if I had friends at all.... And that’s pretty much it.... She’s not too much concerned about my social life.” Similarly, Ezra, an African American male student, noted that while he had joined a few clubs and signed up for intramural sports, “[My parents] don’t really ask about [social or extracurricular involvement]. They kind of just want me to focus—especially my dad—he just wants me to focus on school. He’s just like, ‘School, school, school.’” 
These parents were frequently skeptical and sometimes openly opposed to extracurricular involvement. Imani recalled how her parents warned her about social engagement: 
Interviewer: What kinds of questions do you get from your family about your social and extracurricular life at [the university]? 
Imani: Not even questions—they’re more so warnings. My parents are always like, “Don’t waste too much time hanging around your friends. If you have work to do, go do your work.” Stuff like, “Don’t party too much. Don’t, don’t, don’t.” . . . 
Interviewer: Do they know about some of the clubs and organizations you’re involved with? 
Imani: Yes, they do, but they’re kind of like, “Do you really want to do that? Is that going to get in the way of you having time for your schoolwork?” Stuff like that. They kind of sounded very pessimistic about it, so I try not to really talk to them about it either. 
578 Roksa et al.
In contrast, students with college-educated siblings had much more open com munication about social engagement and often received support (or at least under standing) from their parents. When asked what she talked to her parents about, Annie responded: 
[My parents] asked what I’m involved in. Then when I tell them, they ask like, “So what does that mean? What do you do?” Then I will tell them about ... “At [political organization’s] meetings, I usually go when someone comes in and you have them speak, that’s pretty cool,” and I’ll talk to them about that. “For [the environmental club], we do a lot of outreach and tabling and flyers and stuff like that.” They do want to know, not only what I’m involved in but what that means, and what I’m doing, and if I would like to be more involved with that or do things with it. 
These open conversations about extracurricular involvement were routine for most students whose older siblings attended college. Sometimes parents even encour aged students to become engaged in extracurricular activities. For instance, Char lotte said: 
Charlotte : [My parents] definitely encourage [social involvement] because they knew first semester I wasn’t really doing much except my volunteering and stuff. . . . 
Interviewer : How do they feel about your decision to join a sorority? 
Charlotte : That was funny because I actually didn’t know if I wanted to rush.... I’m indeci sive and they knew that.... They’re the ones who told me, “Just go see what it is.”. . . I’m really glad I did it, and they encouraged it because they’ve always been able to see what I want, but then I fight myself for it, and my mom’s really great at playing devil’s advocate.... So they were super supportive about it. 
Partying and alcohol consumption are often difficult to discuss with parents, regardless of their prior experiences. When there were no older siblings who attended college, parents tended to focus on warnings and students rarely mentioned those activities to them. As Amir, an African American and Latinx male student, reco unted, 
I tell them that, like, I go to the gym, or I go with friends to play soccer, stuff like that. But if it was something like a party or what not, I would rather keep that to myself, or tell my [younger] brothers about that.... [My parents] would give me the classic parent talk.... “You’ve got to watch out; this is not about who you talk to or what you do in your free time,” like maybe party, drink alcohol, stuff like that. But yeah, I try to prevent myself from calling them or talking to them about that. 
When conversations extended to these topics, students with college-educated siblings generally had more open discussions with parents. For example, Caroline, a white female student, said, 
My friend asked me to go to his fraternity formal with him ... but I talked to my parents about it probably two or three weekends ago, and it wasn’t a pleasant conversation because my par ents obviously don’t know him, and even though I was like, “Oh, he’s just a friend; it’s just going to be fun,” they were very concerned. I actually didn’t talk to my dad for probably over one week because he had to, I guess, just think about everything. But I didn’t actively reach out to him, because I was thinking, “I’ll let him think about it. I don’t want to pester him.” But I talked to my mom, and my mom seemed like, “Okay, you’re an adult. You can make your own decisions. Just be careful.” She was basically telling me I could go. Even though I’m an adult and I can make my own decisions, I didn’t want to go if it would displease my par ents. But then my dad ended up calling me and saying, “Okay, you’re growing up. I guess you 
Navigating the First Year of College 579
need this experience. Your brother is in a fraternity at his college and he has formals, so I guess you should be able to experience that too.” 
Notably, Caroline’s quote shows how her parents’ participation in this discus sion was connected to their familiarity with Greek life, informed by her older broth er’s experiences in a college fraternity. Along similar lines, Fatima, an African American female student, whose older sister attended college, noted that her parents were open to discussing safe alcohol use: 
I would tell them—I remember I told them officially, “Hey, I drink.” And that’s when they were just like, “Yeah, we know.” Like, “Yeah, we already suspected that.” ... They know that I’m young. I’m going to have my young moments, but they make sure, “Okay, but you know not to be out of hand with that, and you need to be safe.” It’s kind of this attitude where they act like they don’t know, but they know. We have conversations about it, but at the same time, it’s like they’re not going to keep mentioning it. They might joke about it. My dad might make a joke, and I’ll just act like I don’t know what he’s talking about. 
Students whose older siblings attended college often reported that their parents understood that extracurricular experiences are common—and even desirable—ele ments of higher education and that partying happens on college campuses. This allowed for a different kind of engagement and conversation. As Nathan, a white male student, noted, “I don’t think just because I’m like, ‘Oh yeah, Mom, I want to go out and party.’ I don’t think she would frown upon that. I think she understands that I need to still get the full college experience.” Having a broader conception of college, one that extended beyond academics, meant that students who had college educated siblings had more open dialogue with parents and received more support (or at least understanding) in the social realm. 
DISCUSSION 
Students from socioeconomically disadvantaged families have less familiarity with higher education, which can lead to a number of challenges with respect to applying to and succeeding in college (see reviews in Deil-Amen and Turley 2007; Grodsky and Jackson 2009). Several prior studies have indicated that siblings can be an important source of information and support as students apply to college (e.g., Ceja 2006; Elias McAllister 2012; Kaczynski 2012; Kim and Gasman 2011). We extend this research by examining whether having college-educated siblings is related to how first-generation students navigate the first year of college. The results indicate that students rarely rely on their older siblings as sources of information and advice, including at times of struggle. At the same time, both the topics and nature of conver sations between parents and students differ between families with and without older college-educated siblings. The primary benefit of having college-educated siblings thus appears to be related to engagement with and support received from parents. 
In addition to offering new insights into the experiences of first-generation stu dents in college, these findings have important implications for theorizing the rela tionship between cultural capital and education. While much of the prior literature has examined the role of cultural capital in reproducing social inequality, this study builds on and extends the literature on cultural mobility (Attewell and Lavin 2007; Deutschlander 2019; Domina and Roksa 2012; Jack 2016, 2019). Research on 
580 Roksa et al.
cultural mobility has illuminated how individuals’ exposure to higher education can facilitate familiarity with and ability to navigate college. Our work extends this litera ture by proposing that cultural capital is not only an individual resource but also a family resource. If cultural capital is conceptualized as residing within families— what we term “family cultural capital”—as opposed to only belonging to individuals, experiences of each member of the family could alter the knowledge, perceptions, and activities of other members. While personal experiences may be particularly impactful, one can learn from the experiences of other family members. In the present study, in families where older siblings attended college, parents were able to engage with students in different and more extensive ways, as well as provide them with more support, especially at times of struggle. 
Since students and parents in families without college-educated siblings rarely engaged with each other in much depth, what explains the more extensive and sup portive exchanges in families with college-educated siblings? Building on prior liter ature, we suggested several mechanisms that may underlie our findings, including parental exposure to information regarding college, their greater ability to bridge the divide between home and college, and their greater confidence in being able to talk to their children about college (Attewell and Lavin 2007; Bueker 2019; Jack 2019). Some of those mechanisms do not rest solely on parent-student discussions (e.g., parents are getting information from the institution through emails and newsletters or during events such as family weekend). More importantly, conversa tions with parents evolve as students progress through college, and even if students do not share much information with their parents early on, parents are likely to learn about specific experiences over time. 
Tensions around independence and what/how much to share with parents are especially pronounced in the first year (Cuba et al. 2016), which may be particularly difficult to navigate for students and parents without prior models. As Jack (2019) shows, socioeconomically disadvantaged students become more familiar with norms of higher education over time and begin to engage with their peers and fac ulty differently, as they gain confidence and experience. Similarly, research suggests that open communication with parents often improves over the college years as stu dents become more comfortable sharing their experiences (Lefkowitz 2005; Morgan et al. 2010). Even students without college-educated siblings are thus likely to engage more with their parents over time, creating avenues for learning about vari ous dimensions of college. 
Moreover, when things do not work out as planned, parents often learn about them even if they are not initially informed (e.g., Armstrong and Hamilton 2013; Hamilton 2016; Hamilton et al. 2018). Students may not tell parents about a bad grade on an exam, but if failing a class leads to changing majors and/or extending time to degree, parents eventually learn about these challenges. Armstrong and Hamilton (2013) showed that while socioeconomically disadvantaged parents ini tially thought that their children were independent and could manage college on their own, they eventually had to confront a different reality as academic and social struggles led to changing majors, extending time to degree, or even changing institu tions. Parents with these types of experiences may be particularly intent on avoiding 
Navigating the First Year of College 581
similar events in the future by engaging with their students more openly from the start the second time around. 
Thus, regardless of whether students are having good or bad experiences, par ents are eventually likely to learn a lot more about college as students progress toward graduation. We are not able to observe this process over time as this study is focused on first-year students. Since the first year of college is essential for subse quent success (e.g., Astin 1993; Mayhew et al. 2016), variation between families with and without college-educated siblings observed in this study is notable. At the same time, the finding that students and parents in families without college-educated sib lings do not engage extensively in the first year does not necessarily hold across the college career. Parents will likely learn about norms and expectations of higher edu cation over time, whether through more extensive engagement with students or by contending with challenges that students can no longer keep to themselves. 
In addition to theoretical implications, presented findings offer valuable insights for policy and practice. First-generation status typically refers to students who do not have a parent or a guardian with a bachelor’s degree (Whitley et al. 2018). However, there is much debate about different ways of defining first-genera tion status, and in particular whether siblings should play a role in the definition (e.g., Sharpe 2017; Supiano 2014). This debate raises questions about who should be served by institutional programs for first-generation students, and whether stu dents whose siblings attended college should be included. Our findings imply that older siblings do not serve as a notable source of knowledge and support as first generation students attempt to navigate college. Definitions of first-generation stu dents, and supports provided to them, thus should encompass all first-generation students, including those who may have college-educated siblings. 
Presented findings also reveal the importance of higher education institutions being cognizant of variation among first-generation students and developing tai lored engagement strategies. Historically, colleges and universities have struggled to engage effectively with families from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds (Hamilton 2016; Hamilton et al. 2018). To facilitate this process, scholars have urged institutions to move from “parent involvement” to “family engagement” and develop a more inclusive lens to engage families from diverse backgrounds (e.g., Kiyama and Harper 2018; Tierney 2002). For example, outreach programs can pro vide personalized information focusing on reinforcing parents’ sense of self-efficacy and expanding family social networks to include educators, alumni, and other fami lies (Tierney and Auerbach 2004). Engaging with parents of first-generation stu dents thus means appreciating their contributions to student success, recognizing that they may have some knowledge of higher education, as well as realizing that their prior experiences with higher education may have been negative (see Hamilton 2016; Hamilton et al. 2018). 
It is important to note that we did not ask students directly about whether sib lings assisted them either when they were applying to college or navigating chal lenges during the first year. Instead, we asked about the college-choice process, navigating the first year, and who they consulted as various challenges arose. We aimed to unearth the most salient factors and actors contributing to students’ expe riences. Siblings thus could have been influential in some ways not captured in this 
582 Roksa et al.
study. Indeed, when asked about communication with family, students often men tioned talking to siblings, but those conversations usually focused on family matters (e.g., siblings’ work or children), not on students’ college experiences. 
Future research would benefit from more directly examining interactions between different family members—including students, parents, and siblings—to gain additional insights into how college experiences of older siblings may shape family dynamics as well as the exchange of information and other resources (see also Roksa 2019). We built on prior research to propose mechanisms that may lead to the observed differences but were not able to examine those directly. Studies that include interviews with students and parents, and do so over time, could provide valuable insights into the underlying mechanisms. 
Moreover, additional research is needed to investigate how the benefits of hav ing college-educated siblings may vary across students from different racial/ethnic backgrounds. Although we did not find any notable variation between underrepre sented racial/ethnic minority students and their white peers, the context of the study and the small sample size make this finding provisional. Prior research has noted the importance of family support for underrepresented racial/ethnic minority stu dents (Ceja 2006; Dennis et al. 2005; Gloria and Castellanos 2003; Guiffrida 2005; Lopez 2001; Rodriguez et al. 2003). Moreover, at least one study of low-income and first-generation students has reported that parental support is more important for Latinx students than other racial/ethnic groups, including African American stu dents (Deutschlander 2019). How siblings may both directly and indirectly support students from different racial/ethnic backgrounds, including potential differences between Latinx and African American students, deserves careful attention. 
Finally, future research is needed to investigate how sibling influences vary across institutional types. Our study was conducted at a highly selective institution, and the patterns observed may not be representative of students’ and families’ expe riences across other types of institutions. The transition to higher education for socioeconomically disadvantaged students is particularly challenging at selective institutions (Aries and Seider 2005; Mullen 2010), and those students experience the greatest strain in terms of reconciling their home and school environments (Lee and Kramer 2013; Lehmann 2014). The extent of sibling engagement and parent-student discussions may thus differ in other institutional contexts. 
REFERENCES 
Aries, Elizabeth and Maynard Seider. 2005. “The Interactive Relationship Between Class Identity and the College Experience: The Case of Lower Income Students.” Qualitative Sociology 28: 4: 419–443. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11133-005-8366-1. 
Armstrong, Elizabeth and Laura Hamilton. 2013. Paying for the Party: How College Maintains Inequal ity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Arum, Richard, Josipa Roksa, Jacqueline Cruz, and Blake Silver. 2018. “Student Experiences in Col lege.” In Barbara Schneider (ed.), Handbook of the Sociology of Education in the 21st Century: pp. 385–403. New York: Springer. 
Astin, Alexander W. 1993. What Matters in College? Four Critical Years Revisited. San Francisco: Jos sey-Bass. 
Attewell, Paul and David Lavin. 2007. Passing the Torch: Does Higher Education for the Disadvantaged Pay Off Across the Generations? New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 
Navigating the First Year of College 583
Auerbach, Susan. 2006. “‘If the Student Is Good, Let Him Fly’: Moral Support for College Among Latino Immigrant Parents.” Journal of Latinos and Education 5: 4: 275–292. https://doi.org/10.1207/ s1532771xjle0504_4. 
Bailey, Martha and Susan Dynarski. 2011. “Gains and Gaps: Changing Inequality in U.S. College Entry and Completion.” National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper Series. Cam bridge, MA: NBER. 
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1973. “Cultural Reproduction and Social Reproduction.” In Richard Brown (ed.), Knowledge, Education and Cultural Change: pp. 71–112. London: Tavistock. 
Bourdieu, Pierre and Jean-Claude Passeron. 1977. Reproduction in Education, Society and Culture. Bev erly Hills: Sage. 
Bowen, William G., Matthew M. Chingos, and Michael S. McPherson. 2009. Crossing the Finish Line: Completing College at America’s Public Universities. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Brand, Jennie E. and Yu Xie. 2010. “Who Benefits Most From College? Evidence for Negative Selection in Heterogeneous Economic Returns to Higher Education.” American Sociological Review 75: 2: 273– 302. https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122410363567. 
Bueker, Catherine Simpson. 2019. “‘You’re in the Basement of This Grand House...’: Habitus Reforma tion and Elite Cultural Capital Acquisition Among Women of Color.” Race Ethnicity and Education: 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/13613324.2019.1599345. 
Cabrera, Alberto F. and Steven M. La Nasa. 2000. “Understanding the College-Choice Process.” New Directions for Institutional Research 107: 5–22. https://doi.org/10.1002/ir.10701. Cabrera, Alberto F. and Steven M. La Nasa. 2001. “On the Path to College: Three Critical Tasks Facing America’s Disadvantaged.” Research in Higher Education 42: 2: 119–149. https://doi.org/10.1023/A: 1026520002362. 
Carneiro, Pedro, Costas Meghir, and Matthias Parey. 2007. “Maternal Education, Home Environments, and the Development of Children and Adolescents.” Journal of the European Economic Association 11: 1: 123–160. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1542-4774.2012.01096.x. 
Cataldi, Emily F., Christopher T. Bennett, and Xianglei Chen. 2018. First-Generation Students: College Access, Persistence, and Postbachelor’s Outcomes, NCES 2018–421. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart ment of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 
Ceja, Miguel. 2006. “Understanding the Role of Parents and Siblings as Information Sources in the Col lege Choice Process of Chicana Students.” Journal of College Student Development 47: 1: 87–104. https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2006.0003. 
Collier, Peter J. and David L. Morgan. 2008. “‘Is That Paper Really Due Today?’ Differences in First Generation and Traditional College Students’ Understandings of Faculty Expectations.” Higher Edu cation 55: 4: 425–446. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-007-9065-5. 
Corbin, Juliet and Anselm Strauss. 2008. The Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Cuba, Lee, Nancy Jennings, Suzanne Lovett, and Joseph Swingle. 2016. Practice for Life: Making Deci sions in College. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Curl, Heather, Annette Lareau, and Wu Tina. 2018. “Cultural Conflict: The Implications of Changing Dispositions Among the Upwardly Mobile.” Sociological Forum 33: 4: 877–899. https://doi.org/10. 1111/socf.12461. 
DeBerard, M. Scott, Glen I. Spielmans, and Deana L. Julka. 2004. “Predictors of Academic Achievement and Retention Among College Freshmen: A Longitudinal Study.” College Student Journal 38: 1: 66– 80. 
Deil-Amen, Regina and Ruth L. Turley. 2007. “A Review of the Transition to College Literature in Soci ology.” Teachers College Record 109: 10: 2324–2366. 
Dennis, Jessica M., Jean S. Phinney, and Lizette Ivy Chuateco. 2005. “The Role of Motivation, Parental Support, and Peer Support in the Academic Success of Ethnic Minority First-Generation College Stu dents.” Journal of College Student Development 46: 3: 223–236. https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2005.0023. 
Deutschlander, Denise. 2017. “Academic Undermatch: How General and Specific Cultural Capital Struc ture Inequality.” Sociological Forum 32: 1: 162–185. https://doi.org/10.1111/socf.12322. Deutschlander, Denise. 2019. “Enhancing Engagement With Faculty and Staff to Facilitate Student Suc cess: An Evaluation of a Parent Intervention.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 41: 3: 239– 259. https://doi.org/10.3102/0162373719845653. 
DiMaggio, Paul. 1982. “Cultural Capital and School Success: The Impact of Status Culture Participation on the Grades of US High School Students.” American Sociological Review 47: 2: 189–201. https://doi. org/10.2307/2094962. 
Domina, Thurston and Josipa Roksa. 2012. “Should Mom Go Back to School? Post-Natal Educational Attainment and Parenting Practices.” Social Science Research 41: 3: 695–708. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.ssresearch.2011.12.002. 
584 Roksa et al.
Elias McAllister, Dora. 2012. Mexican American First-Generation Students’ Perceptions of Siblings and Additional Factors Influencing Their College Choice Process. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Depart ment of Counseling, Higher Education, and Special Education, University of Maryland, College Park, MD. 
Emerson, Robert M., Rachel I. Fretz, and Linda L. Shaw. (eds.). 1995. Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes, second edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Engberg, Mark E. and Daniel J. Allen. 2011. “Uncontrolled Destinies: Improving Opportunity for Low Income Students in American Higher Education.” Research in Higher Education 52: 8: 786–807. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11162-011-9222-7. 
Engle, Jennifer and Vincent Tinto. 2008. Moving Beyond Access: College Success for Low- Income, First Generation Students. Washington, DC: The Pell Institute. 
Godsoe, Kim. 2018. “Science Posse: The Importance of the Cohort in Normalizing Academic Chal lenge.” In Ashley C. Rondini, Bedelia Nicola Richards, and Nicolas P. Simon (eds.), Clearing the Path for First-Generation College Students: Qualitative and Intersectional Studies of Educational Mobility: pp. 285–318. Lanham, MD: Lexington. 
Gofen, Anat. 2009. “Family Capital: How First-Generation Higher Education Students Break the Inter generational Cycle.” Family Relations 58: 1: 104–120. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-3729.2008.00538. x. 
Goodman, Joshua, Michael Hurwitz, Jonathan Smith, and Julia Fox. 2015. “The Relationship Between Siblings’ College Choices: Evidence From One Million SAT-Taking Families.” Economics of Educa tion Review 48: 75–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2015.05.006. 
Gloria, Alberta M. and Jeanett Castellanos. 2003. “Latina/o and African American Students at Predomi nately White Institutions: A Psychosociocultural Perspective of Cultural Congruity, Campus Climate, and Academic Persistence.” In Jeanett Castellanos and Lee Jones (eds.), The Majority in the Minority: Expanding the Representation of Latino Faculty, Administrators, and Students in Higher Education: pp. 71–92. Sterling, VA: Stylus. 
Grodsky, Eric and Erika Jackson. 2009. “Social Stratification in Higher Education.” Teachers College Record 111: 10: 2347–2384. 
Grodsky, Eric and Melanie T. Jones. 2007. “Real and Imagined Barriers to College Entry: Perceptions of Cost.” Social Science Research 36: 2: 745–766. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2006.05.001. Guiffrida, Douglas. 2005. “To Break Away or Strengthen Ties to Home: A Complex Issue for African American College Students Attending a Predominantly White Institution.” Equity & Excellence in Education 38: 1: 49–60. https://doi.org/10.1080/10665680590907864. 
Hamilton, Laura T. 2016. Parenting to a Degree: How Family Matters for College Women’s Success. Chi cago: University of Chicago Press. 
Hamilton, Laura, Josipa Roksa, and Kelly Nielsen. 2018. “Providing a ‘Leg Up’: Parental Involvement and Opportunity Hoarding in College.” Sociology of Education 91: 2: 111–131. https://doi.org/10. 1177/0038040718759557. 
Hurtado, Sylvia, Deborah Faye Carter, and Albert Spuler. 1996. “Latino Student Transition to College: Assessing Difficulties and Factors in Successful College Adjustment.” Research in Higher Education 37: 2: 135–157. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01730113. 
Jack, Anthony A. 2016. “(No) Harm in Asking: Class, Acquired Cultural Capital, and Academic Engage ment at an Elite University.” Sociology of Education 89: 1: 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0038040715614913. 
Jack, Anthony A. 2019. The Privileged Poor: How Elite Colleges Are Failing Disadvantaged Students. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Johnson, Anthony M. 2019. “‘I Can Turn It on When I Need To’: Pre-College Integration, Culture, and Peer Academic Engagement Among Black and Latino/a Engineering Students.” Sociology of Educa tion 92: 1: 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1177/0038040718817064. 
Kaczynski, Kristen M. 2012. Exploring the Influence of Siblings and Their Relationships on the College Choice Process. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Graduate School of Education and Human Devel opment, The George Washington University, Washington, DC. 
Kim, Jessica K. and Marybeth Gasman. 2011. “In Search of a ‘Good’ College: First and Second Genera tion Asian American Students Describe Their College Choice Process.” Journal of College Student Development 52: 6: 706–728. https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2011.0073. 
Kim, Doo H. and Barbara Schneider. 2005. “Social Capital in Action: Alignment of Parental Support in Adolescents’ Transition to Postsecondary Education.” Social Forces 84: 2: 1181–1206. https://doi.org/ 10.1353/sof.2006.0012. 
Kim, Young K. and Linda J. Sax. 2009. “Student-Faculty Interaction in Research Universities: Differ ences by Student Gender, Race, Social Class, and First-Generation Status.” Research in Higher Educa tion 50: 5: 437–459. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11162-009-9127-x. 
Navigating the First Year of College 585
Kiyama, Judy M. and Casandra E. Harper. 2018. “Beyond Hovering: A Conceptual Argument for an Inclusive Model of Family Engagement in Higher Education.” Review of Higher Education 41: 3: 365– 385. https://doi.org/10.1353/rhe.2018.0012. 
Langenkamp, Amy G. and Dara Shifrer. 2018. “Family Legacy or Family Pioneer? Social Class Differ ences in the Way Adolescents Construct College-Going.” Journal of Adolescent Research 33: 1: 58–89. https://doi.org/10.1177/0743558416684951. 
Lareau, Annette. 2011. Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life, With an Update a Decade Later, second edition. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Lareau, Annette and Erin M. Horvat. 1999. “Moments of Social Inclusion and Exclusion: Race, Class, and Cultural Capital in Family-School Relationships.” Sociology of Education 72: 1: 37–53. https:// doi.org/10.2307/2673185. 
Lareau, Annette and Elliot B. Weininger. 2003. “Cultural Capital in Educational Research: A Critical Assessment.” Theory and Society 32: 5–6: 567–606. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:RYSO.0000004951. 04408.b0. 
Lee, Elizabeth M. and Rory Kramer. 2013. “Out With the Old, in With the New? Habitus and Social Mobility at Selective Colleges.” Sociology of Education 86: 1: 18–35. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0038040712445519. 
Lefkowitz, Eva S. 2005. “‘Things Have Gotten Better’: Developmental Changes Among Emerging Adults After the Transition to University.” Journal of Adolescent Research 20: 1: 40–63. https://doi.org/10. 1177/0743558404271236. 
Lehmann, Wolfgang. 2014. “Habitus Transformation and Hidden Injuries: Successful Working-Class University Students.” Sociology of Education 87: 1: 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1177/0038040713498777. Lohfink, Mandy M. and Michael B. Paulsen. 2005. “Comparing the Determinants of Persistence for First-Generation and Continuing Generation Students.” Journal of College Student Development 46: 4: 409–428. https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2005.0040. 
Lopez, Gerardo. 2001. “The Value of Hard Work: Lessons on Parent Involvement From an (Im)migrant Household.” Harvard Educational Review 71: 3: 416–438. https://doi.org/10.17763/haer.71.3. 43x7k542x023767u. 
Mayhew, Matthew J., Alyssa N. Rockenbach, Nicholas A. Bowman, Tricia A. D. Seifert, Gregory C. Wolniak, Ernest T. Pascarella, and Patrick T. Terenzini. 2016. How College Affects Students: 21st Cen tury Evidence That Higher Education Works, volume 3. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Morgan, Elizabeth M., Avril Thorne, and Eileen L. Zurbriggen. 2010. “A Longitudinal Study of Conver sations With Parents About Sex and Dating During College.” Developmental Psychology 46: 1: 139– 150. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016931. 
Mullen, Ann L. 2010. Degrees of Inequality: Culture, Class, and Gender in American Higher Education. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Pascarella, Ernest T., Christopher T. Pierson, Gregory C. Wolniak, and Patrick T. Terenzini. 2004. “First-Generation College Students: Additional Evidence on College Experiences and Outcomes.” Journal of Higher Education 75: 3: 249–284. https://doi.org/10.1080/00221546.2004.11772256. 
Plank, Stephen B. and Will J. Jordan. 2001. “Effects of Information, Guidance, and Actions on Postsec ondary Destinations: A Study of Talent Loss.” American Educational Research Journal 38: 4: 947–979. https://doi.org/10.3102/00028312038004947. 
Roderick, Melissa, Vanessa Coca, and Jenny Nagaoka. 2011. “Potholes on the Road to College: High School Effects in Shaping Urban Students’ Participation in College Application, Four-Year College Enrollment, and College Match.” Sociology of Education 84: 3: 178–211. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0038040711411280. 
Rodriguez, Norma, Consuelo B. Mira, Hector F. Myers, Julie K. Morris, and Desdemona Cardoza. 2003. “Family or Friends: Who Plays a Greater Supportive Role for Latino College Students?” Cul tural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology 9: 3: 236–250. https://doi.org/10.1037/1099-9809.9.3. 236. 
Roksa, Josipa. 2019. “Intergenerational Exchange of Support: Understanding Resource Dilution and Increased Contribution in Low-Income Families.” Journal of Marriage and Family 81: 3: 601–615. https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12558. 
Roksa, Josipa and Denise Deutschlander. 2018. “Applying to College: The Role of Family Resources in Academic Undermatch.” Teachers College Record 120: 6: 1–30. 
Roksa, Josipa, Denise Deutschlander, and Sarah E. Whitley. 2020. “Parental Validation, College Experi ences, and Institutional Commitment of First-Generation and Low-Income Students.” Journal of Stu dent Affairs Research and Practice. https://doi.org/10.1080/19496591.2019.1699105. 
Roksa, Josipa and Peter Kinsley. 2019. “The Role of Family Support in Facilitating Academic Success of Low-Income Students.” Research in Higher Education 60: 4: 415–436. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11162- 018-9517-z. 
586 Roksa et al.
Roksa, Josipa and Daniel Potter. 2011. “Parenting and Academic Achievement: Intergenerational Trans mission of Educational Advantage.” Sociology of Education 84: 4: 299–321. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0038040711417013. 
Roksa, Josipa and Blake Silver. 2019. “‘Do-It-Yourself’ University: Institutional and Family Support in the Transition Out of College.” Review of Higher Education 42: 3: 1051–1071. https://doi.org/10.1353/ rhe.2019.0029. 
Rondini, Ashley C. 2016. “Healing the Hidden Injuries of Class? Redemption Narratives, Aspirational Proxies, and Parents of Low-Income, First-Generation College Students.” Sociological Forum 31: 1: 96–116. https://doi.org/10.1111/socf.12228. 
Rondini, Ashley C. 2018. “Cautionary Tales.” In Ashley C. Rondini, Bedelia Nicola Richards, and Nico las P. Simon (eds.), Clearing the Path for First-Generation College Students: Qualitative and Intersec tional Studies of Educational Mobility: pp. 19–50. Lanham, MD: Lexington. 
Sharpe, Rochelle. 2017. “Are You First Gen? Depends on Who’s Asking.” New York Times, November 3. Retrieved December, 11, 2019 (https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/03/education/edlife/first-gener ation-college-admissions.html) 
Solberg, V. Scott and Pete Villarreal. 1997. “Examination of Self-Efficacy, Social Support, and Stress as Predictors of Psychological and Physical Distress Among Hispanic College Students.” Hispanic Jour nal of Behavioral Sciences 19: 2: 182–201. https://doi.org/10.1177/07399863970192006. 
Strom, Renee E. and Matthew W. Savage. 2014. “Assessing the Relationships Between Perceived Sup port From Close Others, Goal Commitment, and Persistence Decisions at the College Level.” Journal of College Student Development 55: 6: 531–547. https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2014.0064. 
Stuber, Jenny M. 2009. “Class, Culture, and Participation in the Collegiate Extra-Curriculum.” Sociolog ical Forum 24: 4: 877–900. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1573-7861.2009.01140.x. 
Stuber, Jenny M. 2011. Inside the College Gates: How Class and Culture Matter in Higher Education. Lan ham, MD: Lexington Books. 
Supiano, Beckie. 2014. “When Is a Student ‘First Generation’? Words Fail Us.” The Chronicle of Higher Education, October 9. Retrieved December, 11, 2019 (https://www.chronicle.com/article/When-Is-a Student-First/149289) 
Tierney, William G. 2002. “Parents and Families in Precollege Preparation: The Lack of Connection Between Research and Practice.” Educational Policy 16: 4: 588–606. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0895904802016004007. 
Tierney, William G. and Susan Auerbach. 2004. “Toward Developing an Untapped Resource: The Role of Families in College Preparation.” In William G. Tierney (ed.), Nine Propositions Relating to the Effectiveness of College Preparation Programs: pp. 29–48. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Torche, Florencia. 2011. “Is a College Degree Still the Great Equalizer? Intergenerational Mobility Across Levels of Schooling in the United States.” American Journal of Sociology 117: 3: 763–807. https://doi.org/10.1086/661904. 
Whitley, Sarah E., Grace Benson, and Alexis Wesaw. 2018. First-Generation Student Success: A Land scape Analysis of Programs and Services at Four-Year Institutions. Washington, DC: Center for First Generation Student Success, NASPA–Student Affairs Administrators in Higher Education, and Entangled Solutions. 
Wilbur, Tabitha G. and Vincent Roscigno. 2016. “First Generation Disadvantage and College Enroll ment/Completion.” Socius 2: 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1177/2378023116664351. 

Copyright of Sociological Forum is the property of Wiley-Blackwell and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
